[]

[]

7 Steps

to

Better

Writing

How to write better reports, proposals,

email, blogs, and web content

Charles Maxwell

TOWERING SKILLS LLC

OceanofPDF.com

Copyright © 2020 by Towering Skills LLC

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced,
distributed, transmitted, or stored in whole or in part in any form or
by any means

without the written permission of the copyright owner, except by
reviewers, who may quote brief excerpts.

Limit of Liability and Disclaimer of Warranty: While the author and

publisher took great care preparing this book, and they believe the
advice to be sound, they make no representations or warranties with
respect to the accuracy, completeness, or efficacy of this work, and
they disclaim any implied warranties of fitness for a particular
purpose. The reader alone is responsible for the consequences—both
positive and negative—of applying the ideas conveyed by this book.

Kindle Edition 1.02

Published by

Towering Skills LLC, Queen Creek, Arizona

www.toweringskills.com

Paperback edition ISBN 978-1-7314-6488-0

Kindle edition ASIN B08HJYQW6W

OceanofPDF.com

Table of Contents

What You Will Learn

Good Writing Is Important

Documents Are the Bridges We Build to Convey Our Thoughts

Clear Writing Improves Thinking

Good Writing Has Always Been Important

The Modern World Depends on Writing

Writing Better Can Boost Your Career

Conclusion

Additional Resources

7-Step Writing Process

Your Personal Plan

Additional Resources

Step 1 – Identify Readers & Purpose

Seek Guidance

Put Yourself in the Place of Your Readers

Define Your Purpose

Write or Not Write

Make Notes

Create an Attribute Matrix

Match Your Document’s Form to Its Purpose

Control the Tone

Summary

Your Personal Plan

Additional Resources

Step 2 – Collect Information

Consider Your Purpose

Set a Goal

Report Progress

Sources

Note Taking

Tools for Capturing Information

Calculations, Drawings, and Sketches

Summary

Your Personal Plan

Additional Resources

Step 3 – Brainstorm

Brainstorming Strategies

Capture Techniques

Assess Completeness

Summary

Your Personal Plan

Additional Resources

Step 4 – Organize

Organization Steps

Formal Outlines

Templates

Patterns

Capture Attention

Storytelling

Summaries and Conclusions

Persist

Summary

Your Personal Plan

Additional Resources

Step 5 – Draft

Withhold Judgment

Find a Place Where You Can Focus

Music

Select the Best Time of the Day

Have Your Equipment Ready

Use Voice Recognition Software

Go for Speed

Write Short Sentences

Talk to Your Readers

Control the Tone

Keep a Little in Reserve

Working with Data and Images

Draft the Summary and Conclusions Last

Summary

Your Personal Plan

Additional Resources

Step 6 – Revise

Take a Structured Approach to Editing

Editing Equipment

Remember the Reader

Develop Your Ideas

Grammar

Keep It Simple – Less Can Be More

Provide Facts

Be Alert to Commonly Misused Words

Use Concrete Nouns and Strong Verbs

Avoid Confusing Pronouns

Choose the Right Words

Subordinate Less Important Details

Emphasize What Is Important

Use Active Voice

Make Positive Assertions

Place the Most Important or Complex at the End

Proceed from Known to Unknown

Keep Related Words Together

Use Parallel Construction to Discuss Similar Ideas

Use Different Constructions for Variety and Development

Check the Sound

Use Transitions

Fix Capitalization and Punctuation

Attend to Page Layout and Design

Practice

Summary

Your Personal Plan

Additional Resources

Step 7 – Proof

Determine the Right Amount of Proofing

Give Yourself Time

Take a Sequenced Approach

Read Aloud

Print or Reformat the Document

Get Help

Track Changes

Use Spelling, Grammar, and Style Checking Software

Obtain More Spelling Help

Watch Out for Words People Confuse

Capitalization

Punctuation

Visual Appearance

Summary

Your Personal Plan

Additional Resources

Application – Preparing Informative Documents

Email

Letters and Memos

Reports

Presentations

Articles, Blogs, and Websites

Business Proposals

Summary

Your Personal Plan

Additional Resources

Afterword

Your Personal Plan

Additional Resources

Appendix – Words People Confuse

Photo Credits

Author

One Last Thing

Notes

OceanofPDF.com

What You Will Learn

This book will help you write better, faster, and with more ease and

confidence. The ability to write well is essential to your success.

Much of what we read today is poorly written. This seems to make it

acceptable to disregard how you write. But this is not true. Poorly
written documents are ignored, only partly read, or misunderstood.

You know this. Your email inbox is full of unwanted and irrelevant

sales copy. At your job, you are expected to read manuals, reports, and
contracts that are long-winded and impenetrable. It is slow reading and
hard thinking. And there is a lot of it.

This type of material brings with it mental discomfort every time you

have to engage with it. The fog causes lost productivity, lost support,
and lost sales.

Moreover, if what other people write is so bad, what can you say about

your own writing? Is it more of the same? A murky miasma?

What if it were clear, concise, and engaging? What could you

accomplish if what you wrote stood out like a brilliant neon sign in a
dark night?

If what you write is not as succinct and engrossing as you would like,

then this book is for you. This slim volume will show you how to capture
and keep the attention of your readers. It will deliver the insights you
need to write with skill.

This book is the outgrowth of my own long journey to improve my

writing as an engineer, analyst, manager, and ghostwriter. A dozen years
ago, I assembled what I had learned into a short course and coaching

practice. That work eventually resulted in this book. People with
decades of professional experience—as well as those just out of high
school and college—have benefited by learning and using the principles
shared here.

If you use my 7-step writing process, I know your writing will

improve. You will be able to:

Capture the attention of your readers

Save time collecting the facts needed to support your writing

projects

Frame your thoughts quickly

Develop convincing arguments

Compose with speed

Cut out the fat that keeps people from reading your material

Produce engaging documents that achieve results

Be more confident

Furthermore, you will learn how to leverage the latest electronic

technology to do more with less effort. Be assured—there is a lot more
to this than spelling and grammar checking.

One other point. This book covers 99% of what you need to know to

write well, yet the book has less than 40,000 words. There is no other
resource this comprehensive and concise.

Applying these principles will help you write with brevity, clarity,

efficacy, and power.

Let’s get started.

OceanofPDF.com

[]

Good Writing Is Important

Effective writing drives the success of individuals and organizations.

Well-written documents achieve better results and save time. Some
experts estimate that poor writing costs the US economy $400 billion
each year.

Given this information, the annual global cost of poor writing surely
tops $1 trillion.

But, poor writing does more than waste money. It also fosters

misunderstanding, damages relationships, and wastes human potential.

While most people are unconcerned about the aggregate loss, we each

are acutely aware of our own disappointments and pain. Sales are lost by
poorly written proposals and ineffective sales copy. Careers are stunted
by weak writing skills. In addition, all of us have been frustrated by
confusing instructions and angered by harsh internet posts and
insensitive emails.

Tom Peters says, “The quality of written communication is still

incredibly important.… Work on your writing. It is a timeless and

powerful skill.” [1] (photo credit)

Good writers in business, government, technology, the sciences,

education, sports, the arts, religion, and charities know they need to

understand their audience and customize their messages to specific

interests. They work to understand their readers’ needs, to deliver
useful information, and to motivate action.

OceanofPDF.com

[]

Documents Are the Bridges We Build to Convey Our Thoughts

Like builders needing to construct bridges to cross rivers, writers face
the challenge of spanning gulfs of misunderstanding and ignorance. The
documents they create are bridges to knowledge and trust.

Bridges are designed before they are built. Engineers first think

through what will work best for each location and transportation need.

Similarly, writers must determine what ideas are required for each
situation and how to express those thoughts. Often, writers discover how
to state an idea only by venturing forth with a rough draft, revising it
many times—

striving, at each step, to be concrete, brief, and fair, and only then
gradually articulating elusive thoughts. As writers labor to make their
ideas clear, their messages take form like the steel and concrete
spanning out across deep water. In this way, clear writing becomes clear
thinking—with clarity abiding both in the writer and in readers.

Abraham Lincoln was an effective writer who planned his compositions and
thoroughly revised his work. (photo credit)

Consider Abraham Lincoln. He spent much effort drafting and editing

the Gettysburg Address, which includes only 270 words.[2] He was
concerned about the national audience—not just those who would gather on
19 November 1863 at a new cemetery in Pennsylvania. He knew that

journalists would latch on to his words and that millions of
newspaper-reading citizens would reflect on his remarks.

Lincoln wanted his words to serve for more than a personal comment

on the day’s program. He hoped to comfort those who had lost family and
friends. Furthermore, he sought to persuade the nation to continue to
make the sacrifices required to win the war and to reunite the nation.

Being thus highly motivated, he worked hard to determine what to say

and how to say it. His effort was not wasted. Indeed, his words continue
to stir the hearts of people throughout the world.

Your writing too can create bridges of understanding and persuasion.

OceanofPDF.com

Clear Writing Improves Thinking

Marvin H. Swift, a professor at the General Motors Institute at Flint,

Michigan, in an article for Harvard Business Review, showed the link
between writing and thinking. [3] Swift described a manager upset
because many employees were using the company’s copy machine for
“personal

matters, income tax forms, church programs, children’s term papers,” and
more.

Determined to stop what he felt was an abuse of company assets, the

manager dashed off a harsh directive threatening employees with

termination if they continued to make photocopies for personal use.

However, before distributing the memo, the manager reviewed his work and
realized what he had written was not the message he wanted to send. He
started revising the document to eliminate wordiness and to make the

instructions clearer. As he progressed, he realized his note was too
harsh, so he changed a few words to soften the tone. As he did this, he
recognized that the logic underlying his memo was flawed. With this
insight, the

manager began to rethink his logic, and in doing this, he articulated a
different policy—a guideline that would allow employees to pay for and

self-police copies made for personal use. Through these rewrites, the

manager found a better solution.

What is true for memos and short emails is even more valid for

contracts, proposals, plans, technical articles, presentations, and
other complicated documents. Complex and important documents benefit
from

iterative preparation.

This type of effort is not limited to big organizations and expensive

projects. It also applies to individuals and smaller efforts. Most of us
can recall starting to compose an email or letter, having to lay it
aside, and later taking it up again and then seeing how what we wrote
earlier needed fixing.

Turning ideas into words and putting those words down on paper or up

on a computer screen allows us to reencounter our own ideas and imagine
how others will receive them. As we reconsider what we wrote, we learn
from our writing.

This is not a new phenomenon. Since the earliest times, teachers have

required their students to compose and rewrite documents to help their

students master what they were studying.

In general, the best writing requires the hardest thinking. This hard

thinking goes by such labels as analyzing, diagnosing, planning, and

pondering. Facets of this thought process include:

Anticipating the readers’ needs and their reactions

Collecting and organizing facts

Selecting what to say and what to leave unsaid

Fusing small ideas into a larger meaning

Crafting persuasive arguments

Conveying the right feeling

OceanofPDF.com

[]

Good Writing Has Always Been Important

Large organizations have always required documents. Ancient cultures

invented prose thousands of years ago to communicate complicated

thoughts, to reach people at a distance, and to preserve ideas.

For millennia, people have communicated by writing, as seen by this

Sumerian cuneiform clay tablet from 2500 BC, which is an accounting

report on silver assets. (photo credit)

As the world has progressed, it has become more complex, and the

need for clear writing has increased. In the 21st Century, as technology
rushes forward and as trade and communication reaches every part of the
globe, effective writing grows even more valuable.

OceanofPDF.com

The Modern World Depends on Writing

More and more people are using the internet to receive and to provide

information. This is rapidly expanding the amount of written material,
and it is increasing the importance of distinguishing what you write. If
you want to reach people, you need to write material that stands out
from the crowd.

The number of published books now exceeds 200 million volumes.

More than 2 million bloggers daily make a post. In addition, the horde
of internal unpublished documents is gigantic.

In addition, there is email. During 2017, 2.7 billion people sent

269 billion emails each day, of which 50% were non-spam. This equates to
50 non-spam emails per day per person. And many people receive more. [4]

This is a lot of reading.

Furthermore, the majority of managers and professional employees

today are knowledge workers—their job is managing information.

Consequently, many professionals spend a large part of their time
writing or reading documents. Business letters, reports, presentations,
specifications, price quotations, webpages, and plans consume many hours
as workers

research, draft, revise, rewrite, and proof documents, and as readers
read and act on those documents.

Even when people are watching or listening to movies, television,

radio, internet videos, podcasts, music, lectures, and sermons, almost
all of that content starts with the written word. People have to write
it to keep it straight.

[]

Movies, videos, radio programs, and podcasts require writing, as seen by
this script for the first Star Wars movie. (photo credit)

OceanofPDF.com

Writing Better Can Boost Your Career

Few people have been fired because they wrote poorly. However,

many business and technical people have been passed over for promotions,
because they failed to write well. Most people in commerce, industry,
and government have been frustrated to see at least some of their ideas
be

ignored, some of their work go unnoticed, or some of their projects be
left unfunded. Many of those failures are rooted in failed
communications.

We all have encountered emails or internet posts that created the wrong
tone—hurting feelings and generating resentment. In addition, much sales
copy fails to capture the attention of clients, and many technical,
legal, and financial documents are ignored, because they are overly
complicated,

confusing, or incomplete. If we are the authors of these offending or

neglected documents, then we are apt to suffer the fallback.

On the other hand, those who rise to the challenge of writing well enjoy
recognition and other rewards. A few instances I have witnessed include:
A middle manager, with only a high school education, moved

into upper management, because he could write well. His

organization skills and work ethic were excellent, but his

writing skills set him apart from other employees.

A young intern at a large company received praise from a vice

president across the country, because the intern wrote reports

that clearly communicated information important to the firm.

An engineer always found herself in demand, because she

wrote thoroughly researched and data-rich reports on complex

topics.

An engineer lost his job in industry during an economic

downturn, but rapidly found employment in an important

federal agency, because he wrote exceptionally well.

A young professional was retained by his company when the

industry slipped into a deep economic recession causing the

discharge of thousands of employees, because management

valued the person’s writing ability.

A senior manager, who had many enemies in the company,

avoided being fired for many years, because the company’s

president relied upon the person to ghostwrite sensitive documents.

A senior professional, in spite of her having physical health

limitations, was called back from retirement, because

management prized the woman’s towering writing skills.

Superior writing skills are helpful to gaining and retaining management
responsibility. Capturing ideas and decisions in typed words conveys a
person’s intellectual strength and managerial capability. A person’s
writing proficiency shows others your ability to think, organize, and
communicate.

This is particularly important for young professionals who have not yet
established their reputations. Lacking direct access to higher levels of
management, a young worker can gain attention by producing superb

documents. A well-crafted report or white paper can travel through even
the most bureaucratic organization and display the person’s thinking to
high-ranking leaders. Therefore, it is no surprise that writing well is
a vehicle to being recognized.

OceanofPDF.com

Conclusion

Good writing always has been and always will be important. In our

information-rich society, clear and tight writing indicates a perceptive
mind and a disciplined approach to productivity. Embracing these skills
will improve your career.

OceanofPDF.com

Additional Resources

For videos and more information on the importance of writing, go to:

www.toweringskills.com/7steps/more/.

OceanofPDF.com

[]

7-Step Writing Process

It has been said that the secret of getting ahead is getting started,
and the secret of getting started is breaking a complex job into smaller
tasks,

and then starting on the first one and moving on to the last.[5]
Extensive research shows this maxim applies to writing. The best way to
write good material is to:

1. Identify your readers and your purpose.

2. Collect the facts needed to support your message.

3. Brainstorm. Creatively look for thoughts that support your purpose.
Be open to new ideas, and work rapidly to generate

and capture your thoughts.

4. Organize your ideas. Determine the main concepts and supporting
details. Place them in a logical order.

5. Rapidly draft the text, using the materials from steps 1-4.

6. Revise your draft to refine the logic, enhance the structure, improve
the flow, and choose the best words. This is also

called editing.

7. Proof your document.

Steps 1-4 are prewriting stages. Effective prewriting eliminates
writer’s block, helps you compose text rapidly, keeps you on track, and
minimizes the need to revise what you draft. Not knowing how to prewrite
often is the root cause of people’s dislike for writing and their poor
results when they do.

All the writing steps are essential. Generally, collecting material
(step 2) and revising (step 6) require the most time, while the most

technically challenging phase is editing (step 6).

Sequencing the discrete tasks is important. Too often, in an effort to
quickly be done with it, people start composing before they are ready.

Rushing into the drafting step without preparation lengthens the job,

increases the effort, and degrades the product. On the other hand,
making ample preparation speeds the total process, reduces the strain,
and yields better results.

So, start with the first step and then advance one step at a time. As
you proceed, you may need to revert to an earlier phase. This is OK,
because often your progress will reveal things that alter your earlier
assumptions.

Indeed, such learning is unavoidable and beneficial.

OceanofPDF.com

Your Personal Plan

You will gain the most from this book, if, at the end of each chapter,

you pause to consider what you have learned and plan to apply it. This
will help you make quicker progress.

To help you reflect on the key principles, you will find questions at
the end of each chapter. Answer each question by writing or typing your

response.

What do you feel you should do to improve your writing?

What is the best way for you to achieve this goal?

OceanofPDF.com

Additional Resources

For videos and more information on writing as a process, go to:

www.toweringskills.com/7steps/more/.

OceanofPDF.com

[]

Step 1 – Identify Readers & Purpose

The first step to good writing is to gain a clear understanding of your
readers and your message.

Here is why. You do not want to work hard on a lengthy report or

complex proposal, only to see it go unread or its recommendations
ignored.

You also do not want to write an email and later realize that the
substance or tone was wrong. Yet this is what can happen if you misjudge
your audience and their needs. You can avoid missteps if you get clear
on your readers, understand their desires, and match your messages to
their situations.

OceanofPDF.com

Seek Guidance

When starting on a new writing assignment seek guidance from your

sponsor, your supervisor, a topic expert, or some of your readers. Probe
for understanding and make notes. Your notes will prove helpful as you

advance your project.

OceanofPDF.com

Put Yourself in the Place of Your Readers

When writing factual material, you need to know who your readers are,

or at least imagine who they might be. If your audience is indistinct,
your message will be vague or inappropriate.

Ask the questions:

Who wants me to write this?

Who will read it?

Are my readers looking for a solution to a problem? Are they

seeking an explanation, justification, affirmation, consolation,

or something else?

What do my readers think and feel?

OceanofPDF.com

Define Your Purpose

After you understand your readers, define your purpose. Your purpose

will have a topic and a theme. Your topic is the subject—what you want
to discuss. Your theme—also called the thesis or premise—is your opinion
on the topic or the meaning of the topic. As you define your purpose,
ask: What do I hope to accomplish?

What do I want my readers to know or think?

What do I want them to feel?

What do I want them to do?

Limit yourself to one topic, and determine your opinion of the topic.

For example, if writing about software, the topic would be the type of

software, and a possible theme could be your contention that the
software is easy to use, widely available, and appropriate to your
department’s needs.

An alternative theme might be that the software is hard to use, limited
to a few users, and therefore unsuitable.

It is normal to have to invest effort into fully identifying your
message.

Furthermore, perfecting your understanding generally requires an
iterative approach of articulating part of your purpose and then
learning more. If you have limited knowledge of your readership or only
have a vague

understanding of your material, start with what you know and expand your
understanding through research and brainstorming. As you proceed,

continue to visualize your readers and anticipate how they will react to
your message. As you do, you will become more aware of points to make
and

ways to express them.

OceanofPDF.com

Write or Not Write

As you define your purpose, you may decide not to write. Instances

when you should not write include:

Not having anything to say

Not knowing the facts

Being the wrong person to write

Risking too much

If you cannot identify a purpose for your document, then you are

wasting your time. Journalists, bloggers, and newsletter authors have to
find something worthwhile to say. If they do not, their writing is

unfocused, and they will lose readership. If you do not know what to
say, you too will fail to write well.

If you are struggling to clarify your purpose, a way to discover one is
to identify a problem and then provide a solution. Another approach is
to discuss what is new or unusual.

In addition, if you do not know the facts, you should not write. Wait

until you learn the particulars.

Writing also requires having the appropriate individual communicate at

the appropriate time. Perhaps a different person in your organization
needs to write—one with more knowledge, more authority, or less
immediacy.

Select the right person.

On other occasions, the time might be wrong. If it is untimely, wait.

Last of all, there are instances when writing is too risky. A written

message can be too formal, too inflexible, or too dangerous. Customer

dissatisfaction, personnel problems, and criticism are best handled
face-to-face. These situations need flexibility and immediate feedback.

When you cannot anticipate your audience’s initial position or their

changing point of view as a conversation progresses, you will do better
if you talk in person or use the phone. This allows you to modify your

remarks to match the dynamics of the conversation.

OceanofPDF.com

Make Notes

It helps to list your readers and jot down their needs and concerns.

Putting information down on paper or up on a computer screen improves

thinking. As your audience and their needs come into better view,

summarize your message in a few words.

Your notes need not be lengthy, but they need to be written so you can

refer to them later.

OceanofPDF.com

Create an Attribute Matrix

If you have many different types of readers with complex needs,

consider preparing an attribute matrix. This is a table where the rows
list readers or reader groups, the columns list attributes of those
readers or groups, and the intersecting squares show scores that reflect
the reader’s interests or needs.

For example, if you were writing sales copy to influence potential

smart phone customers, you could assign income groups to rows and

customers’ interests (such as modernity, functionality, and price) to

columns. You could then score the intersecting rows and columns with

numbers where low numbers represent low interest and high numbers

represent high interest. You also could do this with age, education,
location, etc.

Here is a simple example, where 0 (zero) represents no importance,

1 represents low importance, 2 represents moderate importance, and

3 represents high importance.

Importance to Customers

Customers’

Income

Modernity

Function

Price

Low

0

2

3

Moderate

2

2

2

High

3

3

1

This method may provide little value to simple problems. However,

complex situations benefit from this approach, because the tool helps

prioritize what to emphasize.

For a complex topic, consider using the data from an attribute matrix to
create a histogram (en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Histogram) or polar
distribution

chart (en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Radar_chart). Obviously, you will go to
this trouble only if the writing project is highly important and
complex.

The essential point is to characterize your readers and their needs.

OceanofPDF.com

Match Your Document’s Form to Its Purpose

As you consider your purpose, define your scope. Determine how long

your message should be. Will a one-paragraph email suffice?

Alternatively, do you need a 100-page analysis? How important is it to
preserve the message and the supporting information?

Simple questions generally call for simple responses. Conversely,

complex inquiries and formal requests dictate more serious formats, such
as reports, white papers, and proposals. In addition, consider how your

readers will receive and use the information and its delivery vehicle.

OceanofPDF.com

Control the Tone

Tone is the mindset of the writer towards the reader. The writer’s
feelings influence the written word. The writer expresses tone by
selecting events and details and by constructing sentences that reflect
those feelings.

This happens subconsciously. What flows out is tone—be it objective,

biased, cheerful, sad, angry, cordial, serious, whimsical, open,
guarded, a combination of any of these, or something entirely different.
(You will find

more information on tone in the chapter on writing step 5.)

What is important is to match your document’s tone to its purpose.

You will accomplish this by controlling how you feel about the topic and
your readers. So, consider tone.

OceanofPDF.com

Summary

In conclusion, writing well starts with understanding your readers,

identifying their needs, and determining a message. Laying this
foundation will ensure that the rest of your work is productive.

OceanofPDF.com

Your Personal Plan

What documents do you need to write soon? Who will read those

documents? What do your readers want or need to hear? How will

you satisfy their needs?

On your next writing project, make a list of your readers and their

needs. If your list is long and your readers’ needs complex, prepare an
attribute table showing the intersections of your readers and their

needs. Use this list or table to guide your research and writing.

OceanofPDF.com

Additional Resources

For videos and more ideas on identifying your readers and

understanding your purpose, go to: www.toweringskills.com/7steps/more/.

OceanofPDF.com

[]

Step 2 – Collect Information

Much of what you will need to write will require more information

than you possess when you begin. The challenge is to gather sufficient
suitable material as fast as possible.

OceanofPDF.com

Consider Your Purpose

Collecting materials for a writing assignment starts with having a clear
view of your readers and your scope. As you begin to gather information,
ask:

What material do I already have that I can use?

What additional data would I like to have?

What are the best sources for finding more material?

How much time can I devote to research?

What type of startling facts or stories should I target, which

will attract attention and support my purpose?

OceanofPDF.com

Set a Goal

Decide how much time you can devote to research. If you are not

specific, you easily can waste time learning interesting things, but not
achieve your purpose promptly.

Make a research list and refer to it as you advance your project. Your
plan should include:

Questions to answer

Topics to flesh out

Milestone dates for completing phases of your research

Likely sources

Locations of those sources

OceanofPDF.com

Report Progress

As you advance your research, monitor your progress and periodically

report to your sponsor (and, if appropriate, to your readers and other

stakeholders). This will ensure that you stay oriented and make good use
of your time and means. It also will help you gain buy-in and win
approval of your completed project.

Be accountable. Focus on what is important. Research can be

recreation, true; but if you have made a commitment to complete your

assignment by a set time, then you must work on your task and not get

distracted.

OceanofPDF.com

Sources

As you determine what evidence will best suit your purpose, consider

where to find that information. Ask yourself:

Do my readers expect to see evidence from primary or

secondary sources? (Primary sources are those with

immediate knowledge: experiments, observations, interviews,

surveys, etc.; while secondary sources are distillations of

primary sources.)

What are the sources that I can most easily access that will

supply the information I need?

Yourself

Start your research by determining what you already know on the topic

and what resources you have in your immediate possession. Do this before
expanding out.

Other People

Other people usually are your next best source of information. Talk to
those who can directly supply information or who can direct you to other
leads. Tap into coworkers, your professional network, suppliers, and

customers.

Determine the experts who are accessible to you. Specialists can

quickly provide information that would take you much longer to discover
on your own.

Interviews

As you proceed, use good interviewing techniques. Here are tips for

conducting interviews:

Interview one person at a time. Group interviews are difficult

to control and can easily get off track.

In advance, make an appointment for the interview, even if the

appointment is as little as 15 minutes ahead. This allows the

interviewee to focus on the interview and avoid interruptions.

In addition, it allows the interviewee’s subconscious mind to begin
collecting information before the interview.

Schedule enough time for the interview.

When first talking to the interviewee to make an appointment,

avoid launching into a discussion. You will get better

information if you schedule the interview, because this allows

the interviewee time to think about the topic.

Plan what questions you will ask, and anticipate what your

interviewee might say. Prepare your questions in such a way

that you can rapidly take notes.

Arrive on time.

Upon arrival, briefly chat informally to establish rapport, but

quickly move to the purpose of the interview.

When starting a conversation, gain permission to take notes

and/or to record the conversation.

Do not attempt to write everything the other person says. If

necessary, use a voice recorder to capture the conversation.

(Obtain verbal and/or written permission before doing so. If

you need written permission, come prepared with a permission

form.)

Minimize noise. Ask the person to turn off music or the TV.

When recording a conversation, move away from other

sources of noise, such as heaters, air conditioning vents, and

open windows.

Minimize interruptions and distractions. This can take the

form of asking the person being interviewed to avoid

answering the phone and asking other persons in the office or

the home to refrain from coming into the room.

Ask open-ended questions. Listen patiently for answers. Do

not prompt answers.

Take notes as you listen, even if you record the conversation.

When you have questions that need clarification, write them

down and ask them later, rather than interrupting the

interviewee—let the person talk without disrupting their flow

of ideas. Even if answers are lengthy or predictable, do not

cut off the person’s answers, because you think you know what he or she
is going to say.

As the conversation draws to an end, summarize what the

person said and what you learned. If you intend to create a

transcript, ask permission to send the material back to the

interviewee for his or her review.

If appropriate, later provide the interviewee with a copy of the

corrected transcript, voice recording, and/or notes.

Internet

Once you have exhausted the immediate resources of people close to

you, reach out to compiled resources. Today, the internet provides the
best

source for free and quick information. Google, Bing, and other search

engines can identify a wealth of resources. This may be sufficient for
your

assignment.

For material that was on the internet in the past, but which is no
longer

online, consult Archive.org. Archive.org also preserves books, audio
recordings, videos, images, and software programs. It is a wonderful

storehouse of published works.

Wikipedia and its sister projects are powerful resources for getting
started. While they are not unbiased, they provide broad understanding
on millions of topics. In addition, the Wiki-links and references offer

launching points to find more information.

For research by scholars use Google Scholar and Microsoft Academic.

In addition, you might want to check into some of the specialized
academic databases and search engines listed by Wikipedia at:

en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_academic_databases_and_search_engines.

Government Websites

Government sites also are highly useful. An exhaustive index of US

federal agencies is at: www.usa.gov/federal-agencies/.

Wikipedia also provides an extensive index of US government websites

organized by branches of the government:

en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_federal_agencies_in_the_United_States.

For economic data, see the World Bank (www.worldbank.org) and the

US Federal Reserve Banks (www.federalreserve.gov).

If you cannot quickly find what you need, consider phoning

government offices and asking where to locate information. In much of
the world, governments are legally required to make information
available to the public.

Published Sources

If you believe you need to consult published sources, start with

WorldCat (www.worldcat.org). WorldCat is a huge, online catalog of
materials from libraries worldwide. It catalogs books, articles, music,
and videos from more than 72,000 libraries located in 170 countries and

territories. As of 2020, the catalog identified 3 billion items. [6]

If your local library does not have what you need, use an inter-library
loan service to access distant sources.

Often it makes sense to purchase books that discuss your topic. Used

books generally are inexpensive. Amazon and other booksellers are where
to look. Book and product reviews, which Amazon pioneered, are

particularly helpful.

Also, consider videos, films, television, radio, podcasts, and audio

books for collecting information.

OceanofPDF.com

Note Taking

Depending on where you find information, there are different strategies
for notetaking.

Printed Materials and Online Text

When you need to read a large volume of material, first skim the

documents quickly, consulting tables of content, summaries, and
graphics.

When reading the most relevant sources, consider printing the material

and then reading it from paper, or read it from a lightweight electronic
device. This often results in higher reading speed and better retention.

Mark what is relevant and bookmark important sections for later
retrieval.

Consider using a text reader for complex materials that you need to

understand in detail, such as contracts or abstract concepts. You will
find

more information on text readers in chapter 7.

Radio, Podcasts, TV, DVDs, and Internet Videos

When watching recorded or streaming media, it helps to have the

device controller nearby so you can stop and replay what you are
watching.

When watching or listening to live TV or radio broadcasts that you will
not be able to re-watch or re-listen to, record the program.

When watching internet videos or listening to podcasts, speed up or

slow down the playback speed according to the need. YouTube and many

podcast apps allow this, but other players do not. A workaround is to

download the video or podcast and use Microsoft Windows Media Player to
adjust the speed. (You can do this when in the Now Playing mode by right
clicking on the player, selecting Enhancements / Play speed settings,
and then using the slider to select the desired speed.)

When listening to or watching something to which you expect to later

refer, make a simple outline. Take down people’s names and other
difficult to remember facts. Also, use a clock or timer to note where
information occurs, so you can rewind to that point.

OceanofPDF.com

Tools for Capturing Information

Your mind may be sufficient to remember a few simple findings, but as

you expand your investigation, you will need tools to capture the
abundance of material you will consult. This section discusses these
tools.

Paper

Used for centuries—paper with pen or pencil still is the simplest and

often the best way to collect information.

Spiral notebooks and 3-ring binders are handy. You also might find

3x5-inch (127x77-mm) cards convenient for notetaking.

Word Processing Software

Most people will use electronic means to capture information both by

taking notes and by copying materials. A ready approach is to capture
your

thoughts with word processing software. If you have many statistics to
compile, then turn to spreadsheets.

Microsoft Word’s Outline View is excellent for capturing ideas. The

Heading Styles feature provides an easy way to create outlines to keep
facts organized. You not only can save text, but also pictures and
charts by electronically copying and pasting them into word documents.
Also,

consider using Microsoft Word’s Manage Sources feature to capture

sources.

Evernote and OneNote

Another approach to notetaking is software designed for making notes,

such as Evernote or Microsoft’s OneNote.

Conversations and Sounds

Digital voice recorders and smart phones provide the means to capture

conversations and make verbal notes. In the past, medical, legal, and
law enforcement professionals generally were the only people who could
afford to have their notes professionally transcribed. Now,
voice-to-text

applications are making transcriptions available free to everyone.

Voice-to-Text Applications

Most smart phones, tablet devices, and PCs convert voice into text.

The Android and iOS applications are good, if used in a quiet
environment, but they generally only function by recognizing a few
sentences at one time.

For dictating a lot of material, you will need an application such as

Dragon speech recognition, Google Docs Voice, or Microsoft 365 (using
the

dictate feature). Dragon is $300, Google voice is free, and Microsoft’s
voice recognition is part of Microsoft Office. These tools work best
when the user is in a quiet environment and speaks without pausing. If
you learn how to compose quickly, speech-to-text applications can be
very

productive.

Capturing Graphics

Smart phones, digital cameras, and scanners provide the means to

capture graphic materials. Many flatbed scanners are small enough to
pack around with a laptop PC, and scanners produce much better scans
than the cameras on smart phones.

If you scan text, it is easy to use optical character recognition (OCR)
software to convert the scanned documents to text.

OceanofPDF.com

Calculations, Drawings, and Sketches

Accountants, architects, engineers, scientists, and other technical

professionals often make calculations, drawings, or evaluations using

specialized software. Microsoft Excel remains the most commonly used

tool for making calculations. Adobe Photoshop, Adobe Illustrator,
Affinity

Photo, Affinity Designer, AutoCAD, GIMP, Inkscape, and many more

drawing programs are available for preparing drawings and editing
images.

Scientists often use chemical, mechanical, and electronic instruments.

If your documents include calculations, charts, or graphic elements, it
is best to complete your analysis and have the results ready as tables
and graphics before beginning to write.

OceanofPDF.com

Summary

The modern world is exploding with new information and with the

means for making this knowledge widely available at a low cost. The

writer today possesses tools unthought-of a few decades ago.

Foremost is the internet. In addition to billions of websites and blogs,
many of the world’s books, printed documents, musical compositions,

movies, and videos are now available through the internet. It is likely
that within a few years essentially every work ever published or placed
into a collection will be available online free or at a modest cost.

However, it still takes a discerning mind to select and organize

information to prepare a writing project. The next chapter considers how
to make sense of these facts.

OceanofPDF.com

Your Personal Plan

What can you do to make your research more efficient?

On your next writing assignment, what can you do to expand your

research?

OceanofPDF.com

Additional Resources

For videos and more ideas on collecting information for writing

projects, go to: www.toweringskills.com/7steps/more/.

OceanofPDF.com

[]

[]

Step 3 – Brainstorm

Brainstorming is the technique of quickly and spontaneously creating
ideas through imaginative thinking. It is an important prewriting step.
It complements the previously discussed activities of identifying your

readership, determining your purpose, and doing research. Brainstorming
helps link existing pieces of information to your theme and reveals

additional insight. This uninhibited thinking helps you mold your
thoughts into a full message.

“In writing, there is first a creating stage—a time you look for ideas,
you explore, you cast around for what you want to say. Like the first
phase of building, this creating stage is full of possibilities.”
attributed to Ralph Waldo Emerson. [7] (photo credit)

OceanofPDF.com

Brainstorming Strategies

You can brainstorm alone or in a group of people. It depends upon the

assignment and your circumstances.

Brainstorming works best if it is fast-paced and the participants work

without criticizing one another.

Speed

Speed is vital. Set a short time target—say, 5-15 minutes. Work

quickly.

Speak whatever comes to your mind. Rapidly capture each idea. Then

jump to the next thought. Let the process gallop.

If ideas do not gush forth, keep working until the end of your time

limit. Generally, restricting the time and using short bursts of effort
will spur creativity. If it does not, consider recycling back to steps 1
and 2 or brainstorm with your sponsor or a colleague.

When done, clarify your notes.

Open-mindedness

Whether working alone or in a group, accept everything that comes.

Do not judge. Embrace diverse and unusual thoughts. Let inspiration flow
from the complete spectrum of possibilities. Invite novel, crazy, and

whimsical notions.

Before you start brainstorming with other people, make it clear to the

participants that their contributions will be valued. Establish rules
that the participants will not hinder the contributions of others nor
judge one

another’s comments.

Not all ideas will be gems. Nevertheless, capture what might be

considered dross as well as precious nuggets. Keep everything—even

notions that seem unconnected or inconsequential. Later, you can judge
how well the ideas support your thesis. For now, get everything down on
paper or captured electronically.

OceanofPDF.com

Capture Techniques

Make notetaking as simple and easy as possible.

When working alone, start with a clean computer screen, whiteboard,

or sheet of paper. As ideas flow, immediately seize them and summarize
them. Write just enough to grasp each thought. Abbreviate.

When working as a group, be fully transparent to the participants. Use a
method where everyone can take in what is happening.

Lists

The simplest approach to record a brainstorming session is to make a

list of the ideas. Jot down, in a few words, each idea as it pops into
your mind or as a participant speaks it.

Note Cards

Another approach to notetaking while brainstorming is to place ideas

on note cards, Post-it notes, or scraps of paper. This technique works
equally well for small or large groups. It has the advantage of allowing
participants to write down their own ideas. Small groups can place their
notes on a large sheet of paper, tabletop, easel, or whiteboard, while
larger groups can place their notes on meeting room walls or on multiple
easel pads.

Mind Maps

Another approach is mind-mapping. Mind-mapping is the creative
arrangement of key words on a writing surface. You can use software

designed specifically for mind-mapping (discussed below) or write on

paper, a dry-erase board, or a chalkboard.

When drawing a mind map by hand, a person working alone or the

person serving as scribe for a group places the major idea (theme) in
the center of the writing space and then adds key words or short phrases
around the theme to depict related ideas. When relationships emerge, the
scribe adds lines to connect the associated concepts.

The mapmaker adds words and lines rapidly. He or she arranges them

arbitrarily if they occur randomly or places them logically if they are

related.

When mind-mapping, do not get hung up organizing the ideas. Rather,

capture as many thoughts as practical and with as little effort as
possible.

You can find videos and further information on mind-mapping at:

www.toweringskills.com/writing/mind-mapping/.

Electronic notetaking is essential if your team is located in different
offices and must communicate by phone or other electronic means.

Electronic notetaking also can be handy if later you will share the
results with other people.

Many mind-mapping applications enable dispersed groups to jointly

construct mind maps and to immediately see their maps grow as

participants collaborate. Some of the popular programs for mind-mapping
are:

Ayoa by OpenGenius

MindManager by Mindjet

MindMapper by SimTech

MindView by MatchWare

Visio by Microsoft These are just a few of the many products. Although
less efficient,

collaborators can use drawing, drafting, or presentation software.
Further resources on mind-mapping include:

Wikipedia list of mind-mapping software,

en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_mind_mapping_software

Mind-Mapping.org list of the more than 240 currently

operating software products for mind-mapping, www.mind-

mapping.org/

So, the choices for mind-mapping abound.

Ishikawa Diagrams

Sometimes a bit of structure helps brainstorming. One of the best

approaches is the fishbone diagram technique. Kaoru Ishikawa pioneered
this method at the Kawasaki shipyards during the 1960s to control
quality.

He applied cause-and-effect diagrams, which look like fish skeletons, to
categorize the causes contributing to problems.

[]

Ishikawa Diagram

Ishikawa used a backbone to represent a major problem, and then

added rib bones to represent less important aspects of the problem.

Major categories typically include:

People

Machines

Materials

Methods (policies, procedures, rules)

Measures (measurements)

Environ (location, condition)

An Ishikawa diagram provides a framework for collecting subordinate

ideas underneath a primary idea. The categories help stimulate a more

complete exploration of possible causes. It is easy for a single person
or group to explore each category and broaden their understanding of a
topic.

This structured approach generally elicits more ideas. In addition, the
technique keeps the ideas organized.

OceanofPDF.com

Assess Completeness

After you brainstorm a topic, take a break. Then come back to your

brainstorming record. Decide if you collected sufficient material. If
you have enough ideas, then move on. If not, repeat the idea generation
process or consider using a structured idea-generation technique.

Through brainstorming, you might discover that you need to do more

research, redefine your audience, or reframe your theme. Particularly
when working on a difficult problem, you may have to cycle back and
forth

between research, brainstorming, and theme definition.

OceanofPDF.com

Summary

Brainstorming is an essential prewriting aide. It improves your ability
to discover and link ideas.

Brainstorming has a high benefit-cost ratio. It requires minimal time

and yet yields huge benefits.

In the next chapter, you will turn your brainstormed ideas into

communication plans.

OceanofPDF.com

Your Personal Plan

What can you do to improve your brainstorming skills?

On your next writing assignment, make a mind map or use an Ishikawa

diagram.

What will you do to improve the brainstorming skills of your

organization?

On your next writing assignment, lead a brainstorming session with at
least two other people. Capture the group’s ideas with a mind map or an
Ishikawa diagram.

OceanofPDF.com

Additional Resources

For videos and more ideas on brainstorming, go to:

www.toweringskills.com/7steps/more/.

OceanofPDF.com

[]

Step 4 – Organize

One more thing you need to do before you start writing is to sequence

your material. Determine what is most important. Subordinate less

important ideas. And then place everything in a logical order, thereby
creating a unified stream of thought.

OceanofPDF.com

Organization Steps

A good way to start organizing is to:

1. Cluster related ideas

2. Place the clusters in order

3. Add missing elements and eliminate duplicates

4. Strive for unity

Cluster Related Ideas

Working with your mind map, cluster related ideas into groups. If

working on paper, a chalkboard, or a dry-erase board, use lines and
circles to connect related ideas. When using notes or cards, move the
notes or cards into related groups.

Alternatively, transfer your ideas from your mind map to an Ishikawa

diagram.

Place in Order

After you have grouped related concepts, determine what is most

important and what is less important, and then determine the order that
will best appeal to your readers. Decide where your message will start
and

where it will end, and then select what will follow the start or what
will immediately precede the last idea.

Number the major ideas 1, 2, 3, etc., and number the subordinate

concepts: 1.1, 1.2, 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, etc. Continue until you have included
every concept.

Fill in Holes and Eliminate Duplication

As you proceed, consider what might be missing. Have you answered

who, what, when, where, why, to whom, and how? Are portions of your
message unsupported? If so, fill in those lapses.

Also, look for duplication and eliminate redundancies.

Next, ask yourself if you have the right amount of material. If you

have too much, consider what is of minor importance and eliminate it. If
you do not have enough, determine what details you should add.

Strive for Unity

Each document should focus on one big idea. Do this by revisiting

your plan and determining if the parts contribute to the theme. A
well-constructed outline is like a human skeleton—every bone has a
purpose,

links to another bone, and creates a framework that supports a living
human being.

OceanofPDF.com

Formal Outlines

Brief documents only need a mind map that you group and sequence,

but complex subjects and long documents benefit from formal outlines.

Moreover, many technical reports have to follow prescribed guidelines.
If this is your case, then move the elements of your mind map or
fishbone

diagram into an outline that matches the required guideline.

Outline software is indispensable for long and complex documents.

Microsoft Word’s Outline View is an excellent tool for this. The easiest
approach is to use the Styles feature to designate heading levels, with
the major concepts using the header 1 style and supporting ideas using

subordinate levels (header 2, header 3, etc.). You can find more
information

on Microsoft Styles at: www.toweringskills.com/7steps/styles/.

Google Docs has a similar, but more limited, outline feature.

OceanofPDF.com

Templates

Governments, institutions, and trade associations often prescribe

document templates. Just a few examples include:

Securities and exchange commission reports, such as the Form

10-K and Form 10-Q specified by the US Securities and

Exchange Commission (SEC)

Medical, drug, and food reports, such as those prescribed by

the US Food & Drug Administration (FDA)

Environmental reports, such as the environmental assessment

(EA) and environmental impact statement (EIS) formats

authorized by the US National Environmental Policy Act

(NEPA)

Resource reporting guidelines, such as the National Instrument

(NI) 43-101 guideline specified by the Canadian Securities

Administrators (CSA) for companies reporting oil, natural gas,

and mineral resources

OceanofPDF.com

Patterns

If you are not required to follow a prescribed template, consider using
one of the following structured approaches.

Development Patterns

Evaluate how your major points support your theme and determine

which of the following development patterns best serve your purpose.

Chronological – good for relating events and telling stories

Spatial – good for describing geography, real estate, buildings,

machines, plants, animals, geology, outer space, or other items

where it is important to understand objects in space and how

they relate to other objects

Logical – good for explaining causation and rationale

Lists – good for providing evidence

With each pattern, consider whether is it better to move from the

general to the specific or to move from the specific to the general.

Analyzing Problems

Another useful pattern is the problem/solution model. This consists of:
State the problem

Describe the problem

Identify causes

Propose solutions

Justify the best solution

Proposing Change

When proposing change:

Show the need for change

State the objectives

Show steps to achieve the objectives

Illustrate the superiority of the specified action

Identify who should take action

Provide a schedule and a cost estimate for the action

Persuading

When writing about an idea that is hard for your readers to accept:

Establish your credibility

Cite your experience, training, and certification

Say why the new information or behavior change is important

Tell your readers how they will benefit

Conclude by asking your readers to take specific action by a

definite date

Explaining Complex Topics

When writing on complex topics:

Introduce and summarize the topic

Provide an explanation of all important parts or aspects

Explain how the pieces come together or interact

Make clear recommendations

Conclude with a restatement

Sales Copy

A powerful pattern for selling is:

Gain attention

Summarize your offer

Make a promise – describe the benefits of the offer

Provide proof – cite technical and personal evidence

supporting the promise (testimonials)

Make a call to action – invite the prospect to take advantage of

the offer

Copywriters use many variations of this pattern to sell products and

services.

Consider Your Audience’s Agreement and Interest

If your audience agrees with you, present new information to strengthen
existing opinions and to maintain interest. If the audience

disagrees with your ideas, then give both sides of the argument.

If the audience is not interested in the argument, place the strongest
points first and be brief. On the other hand, when the audience is

interested, provide more information and place your strongest points
last.

Present Testimonials

When providing evidence from people:

Draw testimonials from those with whom the readers identify

Consider the effect that the mention of other persons will have

on your readers and upon your credibility—some references

will strengthen your standing, while others will undermine

your authority

Other Suggestions

Furthermore, do the following:

Avoid sensational claims and hyperbole

Use great care when using satire and irony—these techniques

are easily misunderstood and can backfire

OceanofPDF.com

Capture Attention

Consider how you will capture the readers’ attention at the beginning of
a document. Here are possible approaches:

Ask a question

State a startling or interesting fact

Share a pithy quotation or aphorism

Link to a current event, recall a past occasion, or foretell a

coming incident

Tell a short story or relevant analogy

Link the initial part of your message to your readers’ interests or

needs. Help your readers believe that the document will provide value
for them.

OceanofPDF.com

Storytelling

An important technique for conveying a message is storytelling.

Stories are engaging. They enhance reality and provide a framework on

which to hang many details. Readers will remember your stories and the
linked facts.

Several non-fiction books that do a great job using stories to teach

serious lessons include:

Swim with the Sharks Without Being Eaten Alive: Outsell,

Outmanage, Outmotivate, and Outnegotiate Your Competition, by Harvey
Mackay, 1988

The E-Myth Revisited: Why Most Small Businesses Don’t Work

and What to Do About It, by Michael E. Gerber, 1995

Leadership and Self-Deception: Getting Out of the Box, by the Arbinger
Institute, 2009

When telling a story, use the following steps:

Introduce the story by describing the scene. Provide concrete

details, but supply them judiciously.

Introduce the characters. Tell who is involved. Help your

readers care about the persons in the story—describe their

physical features and interesting facts, and explain motives.

Introduce a challenge. Draw your readers into the struggle.

Tell how your characters face their challenges, and show how

they triumph over obstacles or are crushed by opposition.

Throughout your narrative, paint word pictures, but be

succinct.

End the story and make your point. Explicitly—but briefly—

emphasize the story's application.

Go light on mystery and suspense. Few people when reading business

or other non-fiction documents want heavy mystery and drawn out

suspense.

OceanofPDF.com

Summaries and Conclusions

Start your document with a summary and end it with a list of

conclusions, but compose these sections last. The following chapter will
discuss this further.

OceanofPDF.com

Persist

As you work through your project, it is normal to feel your ideas are

trite or worthless. Many writers experience such doubts.

Roger Angell described, in a forward to the seminal writing guide The

Elements of Style, how E. B. White—a successful writer for The New

Yorker magazine—often felt his writing was inadequate and struggled to
compose interesting articles. His solution was to persist. [8]

William Stafford offered advice for when you have a low opinion of

your work. He said, “Lower your standards, and keep writing.” [9]

This is also true of the organizing phase. Keep working. Later sections
of this book discuss how to fix any problems if they exist in your first
draft.

For now, get your thoughts in order as best you can.

OceanofPDF.com

Summary

While focusing on your readers and your purpose, sequence your

material. Avail yourself of existing development patterns.

Consider using software, such as Microsoft Word’s Outline View, to

place your material into a formal outline.

OceanofPDF.com

Your Personal Plan

What can you do better to organize your ideas before you begin

writing?

What development pattern can you use on an upcoming writing

assignment?

On a writing assignment, include a brief story.

Use Microsoft Word’s Outline View (or a similar tool) to build an

outline for a document you plan to write.

OceanofPDF.com

Additional Resources

For videos and more ideas on organizing your material, go to:

www.toweringskills.com/7steps/more/.

OceanofPDF.com

[]

Step 5 – Draft

After doing the groundwork laid out in the prior chapters, you are

prepared to compose your first draft. The ease of making that first
draft depends on this preparation. With little or no preparation, you
will find the writing task laborious and protracted. On the other hand,
with ample

prewriting, you will write faster and with greater ease.

OceanofPDF.com

[]

Withhold Judgment

Now, just start writing. And the best way to start is to set aside

unrealistic expectations of composing a perfect document in one step,
and begin. If doubts arise, say, “I will do what I can. If there are
mistakes, I will fix them later.”

After you commence, keep going. Using your outline, mind map, or

Ishikawa diagram, write at least one sentence for each element. Withhold
judgment and move ahead. If you have a message to share—which you

came to understand through prewriting—your subconscious mind will have

sufficient material to pass to your conscious mind during the drafting
step.

Often, it seems like magic when the thoughts and words flow.

James Thurber said, “Don't get it right, just get it written.”[10]

(photo credit)

OceanofPDF.com

Find a Place Where You Can Focus

Since drafting requires total concentration, it is essential to work
where you will be free from distractions.

Most people work best in a quiet setting. If you are one of these, then
minimize noise and commotion.

Some people have conditioned themselves to work well in

environments that bustle with activity; but to write, they still divorce

themselves from the hubbub by withdrawing into their minds. Malcolm

Gladwell is one such person. He states he loves the hustle of a
newsroom,

and now that he no longer works for a newspaper, he tries to recapture
the ruckus by writing in busy coffee shops.

When 32-year old Ray Bradbury drafted Fahrenheit 451, he had to

escape the pleasant, but distracting attention of his two young
daughters.

Living on a meager budget, he discovered a basement typing room at the

University of California, Los Angeles library. There, surrounded by

students busily typing, Bradbury rented a manual typewriter for $0.10
per half hour and drafted his best seller. [11]

In a day when people used quill pen and black ink, Benjamin Franklin

wrote in a bathtub. Fortunately, personal computers had not yet been

invented, or perhaps he would have electrocuted himself.

E. B. White, author of Charlotte’s Webb and long-time contributor to

The New Yorker, secluded himself in a cabin behind his home so he could
write.

If you are like most people, find a quiet place, close the door, and ask
others to give you a block of uninterrupted time. If you normally work
from a desk in the middle of an office with much foot traffic and a lot
of noise, then schedule a quiet room, find an isolated desk, or arrange
to work from home or a public library. Do whatever it takes to withdraw
from the commotion so you can focus and write.

OceanofPDF.com

Music

Some people find that listening to music through headphones or ear

pods provides the necessary sound buffer from the chatter and clamor of
an active office.

Cognitive research has shown that instrumental music from the

Baroque Period is particularly effective as background music when

focusing on work that requires concentration.[12] Lyrics, thematic
music, musical drama, jazz, rock, and rap—although enjoyable to listen
to—are

more distracting.

OceanofPDF.com

Select the Best Time of the Day

Choose a time that is best for you. We all have times of peak

performance. Some people write best in the early morning, while others
prefer late morning, afternoon, or evening.

Assess your energy levels and the likelihood of interruptions. Find

what works.

Take into consideration what activities come before and after your

writing time. Many people find their minds are especially clear and

creative after physical exercise. If this is true for you, schedule
writing time to follow your workout.

OceanofPDF.com

Have Your Equipment Ready

Drafting goes best when it moves quickly and with little focus on the

recording method. Writers in the past ensured that they had plenty of

sharpened pencils, a fountain pen that was in good repair, or a fresh

typewriter ribbon. Today methods differ, but you still need to focus on
your composition, not on the mode.

Select the method that works best for you. If you touch-type, there is
no reason not to compose on a PC. Today, we cannot imagine using a

typewriter. If a computer is unavailable, writing by hand is still an
option.

If you type poorly, writing by hand or using speech-to-text software is
a better alternative.

Incidentally, if you do not touch-type, learn. It is an essential skill,
which will serve you throughout your life.

In conclusion, before you start writing, make sure your equipment is

ready. Do not use a PC or other device that is acting up. Resolve
technical problems; then write.

OceanofPDF.com

Use Voice Recognition Software

Consider using voice recognition software. It works best if you speak

sentences continuously without long pauses and without false starts.

Prewriting—having a detailed outline or mind map—can help you rapidly

recall your ideas and speak consistently and thus make voice recognition
efficient. However, if your thoughts come slowly, then voice recognition
probably will not work well for you and could prove distracting.

Although the software no longer needs hours and hours of training to

recognize your voice, the technology still requires a quiet place and

familiarity with the application.

Microsoft 365, Google Docs Voice, and Dragon speech, are the best

voice recognition products available at this time.

For people who write a lot, voice recognition can pay big dividends in

saved time.

OceanofPDF.com

Go for Speed

As you draft, strive for speed. Type, write, or dictate as fast as you
can. Skip mistakes, abbreviate, and add blanks when you struggle for

details. Move ahead. Keep your thoughts flowing. Rapidly consult your
mind map and outline, and keep writing.

Avoid dredging up details you cannot obtain from your research notes

or from brief internet access. If you need to add specific details,
which you cannot perfectly recall and which will take time to find, then
mark the spot with a blank or ellipse for later addition and move on.

When drafting, stay away from the internet except for quick access to

known sources. Going there for other purposes will distract you.

Keep advancing your draft. Get your ideas up on the computer screen

or down on paper as swiftly as possible. Later, add facts, figures, and
details. If you get stuck when working on one part of a document, move
to another subtopic. Add a few blank lines and take up writing on the
other part.

Ignore spelling and grammar errors. When using word processing

software, some people find it helpful to turn off auto-spelling and
grammar checking. The following table summarizes how to turn off these
features with the most common word processing software.

Software

Commands to Turn off Auto Spell Check

Microsoft

/File /Options /Proofing /Check spelling as you type/

Word

LibreOffice

/Tools /Options /Language Settings /Writing Aids

Writer

/Check spelling as you type/ and /Check grammar as

you type/

If you discipline yourself to keep moving ahead, turning off spell

checking and grammar checking may be unnecessary. It is your call.

Another technique to accelerate drafting is to type without looking at

what you have written. This is particularly effective with voice
recognition software, which tends to confuse homophones and similar
sounding words.

In all cases, keep the ideas flowing. Come back later to fix mistakes.

OceanofPDF.com

Write Short Sentences

When drafting, try to write short sentences. Later you will find it

easier to link overly short sentences, rather than break up long and
complex sentences.

OceanofPDF.com

Talk to Your Readers

As you draft, focus on your readers. Talk to them as if they were

seated in front of you. Conversational writing is easier to read, and
writing as if conversing with a person is easier to write.

OceanofPDF.com

Control the Tone

Compose in an appropriate tone. Before writing, determine whether

your tone should be conversational, direct, colorful, or something else.

An informal, conversational tone includes frequent references to people
and ample use of the personal pronouns you, we, us, I, and me. This tone
also embraces the use of contractions, common words, short phrases, and
informal grammar.

On the other hand, a formal tone puts people at a distance. It avoids

contractions and adheres to more formal grammatical construction.

A direct tone talks straight to the topic. It squares up the facts. It
uses simple words, simple sentences, and simple logic.

In contrast, an indirect tone evades direct mention of real issues and

meanders circuitously around the outlying margins of the topic.

A colorful tone springs forth with energetic verbs, concrete nouns, and
bright adjectives to color and enliven the picture. It embraces
metaphors and similes. A lively tone sings and dances.

Meanwhile, a dull tone uses lifeless verbs, abstract nouns, and generic
modifiers. Passive voice is common.

Other tones you might adopt include:

friendly

intriguing

sophisticated

assertive

gentle

sentimental

light

rational

expressive

patient

earnest

urgent

In summary, choose a tone that matches your purpose. As you draft,
strive to achieve that tone. It is not fatal if you do not achieve a
consistent tone at the beginning, but keeping with an appropriate tone
while drafting will save later revision time.

OceanofPDF.com

Keep a Little in Reserve

Many professional writers say they stop writing before they run out of

ideas. They pause mid thought or mid scene, even though they know what
they want to write next. They say this helps them resume writing when

they return to their work. Hemingway said, “I had learned … never to

empty the well of my writing; but always to stop when there was still

something there in the deep part of the well, and let it refill at night
from the springs that fed it.” [13] This technique may benefit you when
working on a long project.

OceanofPDF.com

Working with Data and Images

Tables, graphs, charts, diagrams, photos, and drawings enhance

technical and other informative documents. There are two ways to add

these elements to a document. Some people insert them before drafting
the text. Others find they can draft most effectively without these
inclusions.

Use what works best for you and your assignment. However, it is best not
to mix drafting with inserting. Do one first, and then do the other.

OceanofPDF.com

Draft the Summary and Conclusions Last

Most documents, even emails, benefit from a short summary placed at

the beginning of a document and a clear restatement of key points at the
end as a concluding section. Write these segments after you have written

everything else. If ideas come to you for the summary and conclusion

while working on the body of the document, build a list of these
thoughts and then later use the list to compose the summary and
conclusions.

You also might need to add a list of recommendations or action items

to your document. Both the summary and the conclusion sections typically
state the recommendations, often in an abbreviated form. The action
items can be part of the recommendation or a separate following section.

Consider using numbered lists if you have more than a few

conclusions, recommendations, or action items. Numbering them makes

them more memorable and provides readers an easy way to reference

specific items.

OceanofPDF.com

Summary

Draft quickly and uncritically. If you prepared well, the draft will

progress rapidly. Hold your corrections until later. Get as much down as
fast as you can.

As you become more skilled as a writer, seek to create a consistent tone
when drafting.

Insert tables and figures either before or after drafting your text, but
not while drafting.

OceanofPDF.com

Your Personal Plan

What can you do to draft more effectively?

On your next five drafting exercises, set a time limit. In each
instance, the duration will depend upon the length of the piece you are

composing and your writing skill. If the piece is short, then set a
10-minute limit. If the piece is long, then increase the time limit to
20-30

minutes. Use a timer. Write as fast as possible for the allotted time.

Stop when the timer chimes. Count the words. Compare the word

count or the words per minute over the five drafting sessions. Did you
improve in speed? How did this affect the quality of what you wrote?

On your next writing assignment, consider what tone best suits your

purpose. Strive to maintain the tone throughout your draft.

OceanofPDF.com

Additional Resources

For videos and more ideas on drafting, go to:

www.toweringskills.com/7steps/more/.

OceanofPDF.com

[]

Step 6 – Revise

Do you remember being puzzled by a set of confusing instructions?

Or, can you recall being bewildered by the fine print of an overly
complex legal contract?

If you do, you are not alone. Everyone struggles with complex and

poorly written documents.

Contrast those confused thoughts with the clarity you felt when

captivated by an article that captured your attention and provided a
clear, compelling message.

What made the difference? Why are some documents easy to read,

while others are impenetrable?

The answer is sound logic and well-crafted sentences. They are what

provide high readability. This is the focus of this chapter—to provide
techniques to add clarity and life to your writing. No matter how
effective an initial draft is, there are opportunities to be more
cogent, concise, and expressive.

OceanofPDF.com

[]

Take a Structured Approach to Editing

Editing—the processing of checking, correcting, and rewriting—is a
necessary part of all but the simplest writing tasks. This is how we
ensure that we communicate effectively. Also, it is how we come to
understand our message.

Ernest Hemingway said he threw away 91 pages for every page he

published. Leo Tolstoy rewrote Anna Karenina 17 times. So do not

despair if you have to revise and revise again to get something

acceptable. (photo credit)

Revising is the most time consuming and the most technically

challenging aspect of writing. This is the point where you will do the

“heaviest lifting.” Factors that contribute to the challenge include:

Ineffective prewriting (steps 1-4)

Overly laborious drafts (step 5)

Needing to rethink ideas

Not understanding effective sentence design

Having forgotten the elements of grammar

Impatience—the desire to be done with it

A lack of editing experience

There are very few circumstances when writing does not need

correcting. Even simple emails, text messages, or handwritten notes bear

rereading by the author to ensure that words are not left out.

Editing should start with correcting the most serious problems first and
then move on to fixing smaller glitches. Here is an ordered strategy,
with questions to ask yourself:

1. Serving readers

1.1. Did I address my readers’ needs?

1.2. Is the tone correct?

2. Quality of ideas

2.1. Is my thesis clear?

2.2. Is the logic sound?

2.3. Did I include everything necessary?

2.4. Can I delete unneeded fluff?

2.5. Are things in the best order?

3. Language

3.1. Do the words flow naturally?

3.2. Is the grammar correct?

3.3. What can I do to achieve better clarity?

3.4. What can I do to economize on words?

OceanofPDF.com

Editing Equipment

Before getting into the techniques of editing, here is a word about

equipment. If you compose on a computer, you will want to edit there. It
is so easy to delete, copy, paste, replace, and rearrange.

When writing on paper you also can make changes by crossing out and

inserting words or adding circles and arrows. While this works well for
light editing, major rewrites get messy.

Voice recognition, while good for rapid drafting, is unsuitable for

revising. It is easier to move through a document and make changes using
a keyboard or mouse.

OceanofPDF.com

Remember the Reader

The first step to editing is to assess how well you answered your

readers’ questions and met their needs. Ask yourself:

Does the document tell my readers what they need to know?

Will they understand what I wrote?

Is the document framed from their perspective?

How will it make them feel?

Will it motivate them to agree or to take action?

Answering these questions will help you determine if you have provided

sufficient information, used sound logic, sequenced your material for
best understanding, and created sentences that communicate clearly.

Another way to keep your readers in mind is to use less instances of I,
we, me, us, mine, and ours and recast your thoughts using the words you,
your, and yours. This may seem like a trivial suggestion, but it can
make a big difference.

OceanofPDF.com

Develop Your Ideas

Next, check the coherence of your ideas. Does your document

illustrate clear thinking? Often, the best way to say something will
become apparent only after rewriting it several times.

When editing, look for these problems:

Unclear theme

Incorrect assumptions

Lapses in logic

Irrelevant information

Inappropriate amount of evidence—both too little and too

much

Once you fix those problems, look at each paragraph and ask:

Does the paragraph address one idea?

Does the paragraph have a topic sentence?

Do other sentences support the idea in the topic sentence?

Do the sentences follow one another in a logical manner?

When providing a lot of information, consider using bullets or

numbered lists.

OceanofPDF.com

Grammar

In the same way that chefs understand different ingredients and how

they contribute to a tasty meal, persons editing their writing need to

understand the basic elements of language—words, phrases, and clauses—

and how those elements work with one another. Here is a short summary of
English grammar.

Parts of Speech

Parts of speech are categories of words grouped by the way they function
in language. Modern linguists have many methods for classifying words
according to their function. Those methods provide the most

comprehensive explanation of how language works, but for our purpose,
the eight traditional parts of speech for English are sufficient. They
include:

Noun: a concrete or abstract entity: a person, animal, place, thing,
activity, event, or idea. Examples: George Washington

was the first president of the United States. His horse ran to the barn.
Writing is a challenge.

Pronoun: a substitute for a noun or noun phrase. Personal

pronouns include: I, me, my, mine, we, us, our, ours, you, your, yours,
he, him, his, she, her, hers, it, its, they, them, their,

theirs, thou, thee, thy, thine, ye. Demonstrative pronouns

include: this, these, that, those. Relative pronouns include: who, whom,
whose, what, which, that. Interrogative

pronouns include: who, whom, whose, what, which. Reflexive

pronouns include: myself, ourselves, yourself, yourselves, himself,
herself, itself, themselves. (There are a few other

types of pronouns not discussed.)

Verb: a word that conveys action or states being. Examples: I

saw the dog. He ate his dinner. He is tired.

Adjective: a modifier of a noun or a pronoun. Examples: John’s long
sentences are awkward. I prefer short phrases.

Within the category of adjectives is the article. An

article is a word that marks a noun as being definite

( the) or indefinite ( a, an). Examples: the book, a

pencil, an allowance.

Adverb: a modifier of a verb, adjective, or adverb. Examples: Short
sentences flow quickly. Very long sentences force readers to read
slower.

Preposition: a word that establishes relationship. The most common
prepositions are: at, by, for, from, in, of, on, to, with.

Examples: The team of experts prepared the report for the client by
working from morning to dusk.

Conjunction: a connector. Examples: and, or, nor, but, yet, so.
Examples: She picked up a pencil and some paper, but she forgot what she
wanted to write.

Interjection: an emotional expression, which is independent of words
around it. Examples: hi, bye, goodbye, cheers, hooray,

good day, farewell, oh.

Phrase

A phrase is one or more words that work together as a single unit.

A prepositional phrase is a phrase commencing with a preposition.

Examples: The team of experts prepared the schedule for the client.

Clause

A clause is a combination of a subject and a predicate phrase, where:
The subject is an actor, agent, or attribute carrier. Examples:

John read the email. Proofreading long reports is difficult.

The predicate gives information about the subject. The

predicate contains a verb and possibly other elements.

Examples of predicates: Adam drafted a long report. Sue

revised the last chapter.

Subjects and predicates can be a single word or many words.

Clauses are either independent or dependent. An independent clause

can stand alone. Example: Martha wrote the report.

A dependent or subordinate clause augments an independent clause.

Example: Martha wrote the report after she investigated the customer’s

claims.

Conjunctions that often indicate subordinate clauses include: after,
although, as, because, before, how, if, since, so, unless, until, when,
where,

while, why.

Pronouns that function as subordinate conjunctions are: who, which,
what, that. When faced with the decision of using the subordinating
conjunctions which or that, use that for clauses that are essential to
meaning and which for clauses that are nonessential. Furthermore, add a
comma to set off clauses that are nonessential to understanding the
essence of the sentence.

Sentence

A sentence is a group of words that expresses a complete thought.

Most sentences include at least one independent clause, thus including a
subject and a predicate.

A sentence with only one independent clause and no dependent clauses

is a simple sentence. Example: John read the email.

A sentence with two or more independent clauses joined by

conjunctions or by punctuation (comma, semicolon, colon, or dash) and
free from dependent clauses is a compound sentence. Example: John read
the email, and Nathan read the newspaper.

A sentence with one independent clause and one or more dependent

clauses is a complex sentence. Example: Adam is waiting for the report,
which Sue is proofing.

A compound- complex sentence (or complex-compound sentence) has at least
two independent clauses and at least one dependent clause.

Example: Martha wrote the report, after she investigated the customer’s
claims, but she failed to take into consideration everything that she
had learned.

When a group of words fails to express a complete thought—that is,

lacks an independent clause—it is called a sentence fragment or
incomplete sentence. Sentence fragments occur when:

A subject, verb, or object is missing

Example (missing subject): Ran to the barn.

Example (missing verb): George Washington, the first

president of the United States.

Example (missing object): Matthew received.

A group of words is nothing more than a preposition phrase Example: For
the cause of liberty.

A group of words is nothing more than a dependent clause

Example: When the tide rolls in.

The old school rule was never create a sentence fragment. In academic

settings, the rule still applies. In formal settings, it is best to
avoid sentence fragments, but there are occasions when they prove
effective. In informal writing, you will see many sentence fragments.

Do not confuse sentence fragments with sentences written in the

imperative mood, meaning they are commands or suggestions, such as: Keep
it simple. Use shorter words. Write shorter sentences.

Even though these sentences lack a subject, they are not sentence

fragments. They are commands. As you have already learned, many of the
sentences in this book are in the imperative mood.

Another flawed sentence structure is the fusion of two or more

independent clauses into one sentence without punctuation or joining

words. This is called a run-on sentence. Example: James wrote Sue typed
William phoned.

One way to transform this run-on sentence into a proper sentence is:

James wrote, Sue typed, and William phoned. Another approach is: James
wrote, while Sue typed, but William phoned.

In the example above of a run-on sentence, it is easy to see that

something is wrong with the sentence. On the other hand, it is harder to
detect run-on sentences when they occur in long and complex sentences,

which contain many prepositional phrases and dependent clauses. The

same is true of sentence fragments; they occur more often in long,

confusing sentences than in short, straight-forward sentences.

The way to avoid both sentence fragments and run-on sentences is to

ensure that each sentence possesses at least one independent clause.

Consider the following example of a run-on sentence:

Stringing many words together in pleasant-sounding passages

and providing ample informative facts to your readers does not

ensure meaning or readability this is achieved through sound logic

and proper sentence construction.

Here is the sentence corrected by adding the word rather to link the two
independent clauses with a semicolon preceding and a comma following the
word rather.

Stringing many words together in pleasant-sounding passages

and providing ample informative facts to your readers does not

ensure meaning or readability; rather, this is achieved through sound
logic and proper sentence construction.

You also could correct the run-on sentence by creating two sentences.

Another Language Element

Another form of language important to writing, which is not a

traditional part of speech, is the appositive. An appositive is a noun
or noun phrase set next to a noun or noun phrase that provides more
information. It is set off with a comma or a dash. Example: We discussed
elements of language—words, phrases, and clauses.

Further Reading on Language Structure

There is much more to English grammar and linguistic theory, but these

basic concepts are sufficient to discuss good writing. If you need more
information on English grammar, see the following Wikipedia articles:

English grammar

Parts of speech

Phrase

Clause

Clause syntax

Sentence

Sentence clause structure

Noun

Pronoun

Verb

Adjective

Adverb

Preposition

List of prepositions

Conjunction

Interjection

Determiners

Articles

Appositive

Grammatical mood

Imperative mood

Another good resource is the Khan Academy course on grammar at:

www.khanacademy.org/humanities/grammar.

The remainder of this chapter discusses how to improve clarity.

OceanofPDF.com

Keep It Simple – Less Can Be More

The simplest approach to writing better is to write simpler. Focus on

one idea and develop it with simple logic. Write shorter sentences. Use
simpler words.

Father Tom Allender, S.J. said it well, “If you don’t keep it awfully

simple, it will become simply awful.” [14]

Focus on One Idea

As you edit your draft, you may discover that you have mixed several

ideas together. This can occur at the document level or at the paragraph
level. If the ideas represent a progression, then great; but if you are
simultaneously developing several parallel ideas, it is better to divide
distinct ideas into different paragraphs, separate sections, or discrete
documents.

Use Simpler Words

Short words often work better than long words. Consider the following

examples.

Long Words

Short

Words

additional

more

anticipate

foresee

authorize

approve

compensate

pay

cooperation

help

currently

now

designate

show

endeavor

try

indicate

show

inform

tell

initial

first

retain

keep

requisition

order

Long Words

Short

Words

solicit

ask

telecommunication call

investigation

test

Richard Lederer shows the power of short words in the following

passage:[15]

When you speak and write, there is no law that says you have to

use big words. Short words are as good as long ones, and short,

old words—like sun and grass and home—are best of all. A lot of

small words, more than you might think, can meet your needs with

a strength, grace, and charm that large words do not have.

Big words can make the way dark for those who read what you

write and hear what you say. Small words cast their clear light on

big things—night and day, love and hate, war and peace, and life

and death. Big words at times seem strange to the eye and the ear

and the mind and the heart. Small words are the ones we seem to

have known from the time we were born, like the hearth fire that

warms the home.

Short words are bright like sparks that glow in the night,

prompt like the dawn that greets the day, sharp like the blade of a

knife, hot like salt tears that scald the cheek, quick like moths that

flit from flame to flame, and terse like the dart and sting of a bee.

Here is a sound rule: Use small, old words where you can. If

a long word says just what you want to say, do not fear to use it.

But know that our tongue is rich in crisp, brisk, swift, short words.

Make them the spine and the heart of what you speak and write.

Short words are like fast friends. They will not let you down.

This is not to say that you cannot use big words. If you are a
geologist, such terms as “depositional environment” and
“Paleoproterozoic tectonic subduction zone” convey precise meanings, and
they should be used. This is true for all scientific and business
disciplines. Technical writing requires precise phrases and long words.
Use the words that convey meaning.

On the other hand, avoid needlessly inflating your vocabulary. If you
have a choice between a long word and a short word, choose the short

word. Your readers will welcome it.

Economize – Omit Needless Words

Single words often can replace entire phrases. Economize by

eliminating extra, needless, unnecessary, redundant, nonessential,

superfluous, and excessively elongated and wordy expressions. The

following examples illustrate a single word replacing a phrase.

Poor: Wordy Phrases

Better: Single Words

at the current point in time

now

at that point in time

then

call your attention to the fact that

note / see

in support of the idea

thus

performed an evaluation of

evaluated

in most of the cases

often

participated in discussions to determine

planned

how to

due to the fact that

because

owing to the fact

because

the reason why is that

because

facilitate a change

update

line-of-sight forward-looking view

forecast

Sometimes entire phrases can be eliminated. Consider the following

examples, where emphasis indicates unnecessary words.

Poor: Unnecessary Phrase

-

The engineers discussed methods that can be taken to complete the
project.

Better: Phrase Eliminated

+ The engineers discussed methods to complete the project.

+ The engineers discussed how to complete the project.

+ The engineers discussed completing the project.

Poor: Unnecessary Phrase

-

The use of insulation is necessary to prevent freezing.

Better: Phrase Eliminated

+ Insulation is necessary to prevent freezing.

+ Insulation prevents freezing.

Poor: Unnecessary Phrase

- The transformer will handle instances of 50% additional current.

Better: Phrase Eliminated

+ The transformer will handle 50% additional current.

Poor: Unnecessary Phrase

-

The circuits can be used in series to suit circumstances in which

more than one is required.

Better: Phrase Eliminated

+ The circuits can be used in series.

+ The circuits operate in series.

Poor: Unnecessary Phrase

-

The warning light indicated that a failure had occurred.

Better: Phrase Eliminated

+ The warning light indicated a failure.

In the following examples, emphasis indicates unnecessary words.

Underlining (in red, green, and violet on devices that show color)
indicates thoughts that have been re-expressed more efficiently.

Poor: Unnecessary Words

-

We continued the teleconference discussions with corporate vendors to
finalize the requisition purchase order closures.

Better: Sentence Streamlined

+ We talked to vendors to close the orders.

Poor: Unnecessary Words

-

They decided to defer shipment of the order until the inspector could
arrange an on-site inspection so that the matter could be resolved

simultaneously to his being present.

Better: Sentence Streamlined

+ They waited until the inspector could be present before shipping the

order. [The last phrase is unnecessary and thus was eliminated.]

Poor: Unnecessary Words

-

The project manager continued to administer the preliminary initial

engineering development design work in support of the permitting

activities.

Better: Sentence Streamlined

+ The project manager supported permitting by supervising

preliminary design.

Consider eliminating unnecessary words, such as really, very, kind-of,
sort-of.

Also, consider replacing perfect verb tenses when simpler verb tenses

work as well. There is a slight difference in meaning, but often the

distinction is unimportant. Perfect tense verbs include the helper words
has, have, had, and having. Consider the following examples.

Perfect Tense

-

I have been reviewing the report.

Simpler: Without Perfect Tense

+ I reviewed the report.

+ I am reviewing the report.

Perfect Tense

-

I have been considering having the company buy another insurance policy.

Simpler: Without Perfect Tense

+ I considered having the company buy another insurance policy.

+ I want the company to buy another insurance policy.

In summary, avoid bloat by cutting words that fail to carry their
weight.

Prefer Short Sentences over Long Sentences

Short sentences often work better than long sentences. Many style

guides recommend keeping the average sentence length to no more than
15-20 words. This provides for some sentences being longer and others
being shorter. However, you may find even shorter sentences are better.

The problem with long sentences is they require more time and

brainpower to process. This slows the reading process and can reduce

comprehension.

Consider the following example. The poor passage consists of

1 paragraph, 2 sentences, and 88 words, thus averaging 44 words per

sentence. The second example splits the statement into 2 paragraphs and
5 sentences, reduces the word count to 66 words, and drops the average

sentence length to 13 words.

Poor: Long Sentences

-

Following publication of the document, the Draft Environmental

Impact Statement (DEIS) and all ancillary technical reports will at

that time undergo public review and comment with any significant

comments and changes being incorporated into the document or

explained as not being included by the government agency in their

publication of a Final Environmental Impact Statement (FEIS).

Normally, following the publication of the DEIS, the project is

substantially defined from a technical, environmental, and

socioeconomic perspective, and the project’s impacts to land, water,

and air resources are fully defined.

Better: Shorter Sentences

+ Following its publication, the draft Environmental Impact

Statement (EIS) and its supporting technical reports will undergo

public review. The agency will revise the draft EIS to produce the

final EIS. In addition, the agency will explain comments it

excluded.

Publication of the draft EIS signals that the agency has fully

examined the project. By then, the agency has defined impacts to

land, water, and air resources.

Sometimes ideas require long paragraphs, long sentences, and long

words, but generally short and simpler writing works better. That said,
do not be a slave to short sentences. Using a mixture of short and
modestly long sentences and moderate and short paragraphs provides
variety and

improves interest.

Also, sentences that adhere to the same development pattern can

become monotonous. While using good judgment, consider variations.

Other Techniques to Eliminate Wordiness

Write to the point. Take care to avoid verb phrases when single-word

verbs will do, such as the following.

Wordy: Verb Phrases

Leaner: Single-Word Verbs

continued to work on the project

worked on the project

kept taking the patient’s

took the patient’s temperature

temperature

Be aware of “- ation” and “- sion” words, such as: action, coordination,
customization, discussion, finalization, individualization, initiation,
justification, materialization, normalization, operation, participation,

rationalization, suspension, transformation, winterization, etc. Replace
these nouns with their corresponding verbs. Here are examples.

Nouns ending in Verbs

- ation and - ion

action

act

coordination

coordinate

creation

create

expectation

expect

indication

indicate

transformation

transform

Here are more examples of word economy.

Poor: Wordy

-

We continued to oversee coordination of engineering development

work by Bechtel on the preliminary engineering design of the waste

disposal system in support of the ongoing permitting discussions.

Better: Streamlined

+ We coordinated Bechtel’s engineering of the waste disposal system.

This supports permitting.

Poor: Wordy

-

Roger continued to engage in work to plan the selection of the

preferred route for the water pipe line.

Better: Streamlined

+ Roger planned the water supply route.

Poor: Wordy

-

I continued discussions via teleconferences with equipment vendors

to finalize closures and suspensions of purchase orders.

Better: Streamlined

+ I worked with vendors to close and suspend purchase orders.

In summary, keep your writing lean.

OceanofPDF.com

Provide Facts

In many instances, your readers want to understand lots of details—this
is particularly true with law, government, medicine, science,
engineering, business, sales, and finance—and it is not enough just to
attach a lot of tables and graphs. While tables and charts help organize
data, they are no excuse for not explaining in words the data and the
relationships they

support. Rather, provide evidence and explain what it means.

OceanofPDF.com

Be Alert to Commonly Misused Words

Many people confuse words that are pronounced identically or

similarly, but have different spellings and meanings. Do not destroy
your credibility by confusing words. The Appendix provides a long list
of

commonly misused words. Almost no one remembers all of these problematic
words and their proper spelling, but you should read through the list to
be aware of these words so you are prepared to revisit the list when
using the words in the future.

OceanofPDF.com

Use Concrete Nouns and Strong Verbs

Use concrete nouns and strong verbs. Leave abstractions to philosophers.

Abstract words convey general ideas. Often they are ambiguous.

Typical abstract nouns include: ability, activity, basis, case,
character, circumstance, concept, condition, connection, course, effect,
effort, extent, facility, factor, instance, intent, interest, manner,
measure, method, nature, necessity, order, policy, position,
possibility, practice, problem, prospect, purpose, quality, question,
reason, relationship, responsibility, result, situation, standpoint,
substance, system, type, use, utilization, view.

Abstract verbs include words such as achieve, characterize, change,
develop, do, go, happen, manifest, provide, realize, utilize.

Concrete nouns represent things that can be seen, felt, touched, tasted,
smelled, or specifically identified. Action verbs indicate real movement
or activity.

Compare the following abstract words to their more concrete

counterparts.

Abstract Nouns

Concrete Nouns or Noun Phrases

authority

State Board of Health / Food and Drug

Administration / state auditor / controller / office

manager

communication

letter / email / phone call / report

conformity

plus or minus 0.01 mm tolerance

concept

plan to sell a new insurance plan

effort

basic engineering / draft proposal / 120 hours

worked

idea

written proposal / preliminary diagnosis /

architectural sketch / verbal suggestion

interest

job application / phone call seeking information /

email inquiry

obligation

performance contract

Abstract Verbs

Action Verbs or Verb Phrases

achieve

produce 50,000 liters per day / install 55% / proof the

report / sell ten new policies

conceptualize

calculate output / draft report / draft a sketch on the

whiteboard

conform

not exceed tensile strength of 58,000 pounds per

square inch (psi)

endeavor

work overtime / recalculate the loads

remain loyal

stay with current supplier

Many abstract nouns also have concrete meanings. For instance, in the

phrase “instrument case,” the word case is concrete; whereas, in the
phrase

“the case for reconsidering the design, ” the word case is abstract.

Even concrete nouns and action verbs vary in their degree of

concreteness. Consider the following examples, which contrast general

words to more specific words or phrases.

General Nouns

Specific Noun Phrases

activity

drilling / machining / sandblasting / examining sick

patients / selling / writing computer code

analysis

soil testing / x-ray / blood sugar test

design

AutoCAD drawing of the floor pipes

facility

crushing plant / product packaging line / vehicle

repair shop / operating room

line

stainless steel cold rolling mill

material

soil / heavy gauge structure steel / 4-mm

polypropylene / 1-inch conduit

personnel

waiters / clerks / nurses / technicians / managers

professional

electrical engineer / hygienist / proposal writer

work

excavation / compacted backfill / painting / audit

accounts payable

General Verbs

Specific Verb Phrases

analyze

weigh the samples / conduct breakage tests / test the

resistance

General Verbs

Specific Verb Phrases

communicate

send a letter or email / telephone / talk face-to-face /

read incoming mail

decrease

decline by 10% per year

increase

double in three days

measure

survey with laser transit / gauge with micrometer /

weigh / take person’s temperature

produce

pump 170,000 barrels per month of heavy crude oil /

generate 150 MW / write 600 lines of code

simulate

run Aspen HYSYS modeling software

Often, professionals pile abstractions on top of generalizations,

yielding almost meaningless gobbledygook. The following examples

illustrate the improved economy and clarity achieved by using concrete

nouns and action verbs.

Poor: Abstract Writing

-

The ability to economize is a policy that should be sought after to a

large degree.

Better: Concrete Writing

+ Encourage thrift.

Poor: Abstract Writing

-

Achieving a high level of attainment of financial performance can be

obtained by the successful utilization of a standard collection of

operating practices.

Better: Concrete Writing

+ Operating standards ensure profitability.

Poor: Abstract Writing

-

The practice of understanding the requirements of the business

relative to financial principles is a reassuring trend in the

development of situations that lead to success.

Good: Concrete Writing

+ Profit and loss statements provide the information investors need.

The following sentence by John Dewey illustrates abstraction taken to

the extreme:[16]

Consequences that successfully solve the problems set by the

conditions which give rise to the need of action supply the basis by
means of which acts, originally ‘naturally’ performed, become the

operations of the art of scientific experimentation.

In conclusion, avoid abstractions—use specific language consisting of

concrete nouns and action verbs.

OceanofPDF.com

Avoid Confusing Pronouns

Eliminate confusing pronouns. Below are examples.

Poor: Ambiguous Pronouns

-

The woman talked to her coworker about the problem she was having with
her friend, who kept visiting the office seeking her help revising her
resume to apply for a position at her former company.

Better: Clear

+ Jane talked to Terry about Jane’s friend Maria, who wanted to apply

for a position at Jane’s former company and who kept visiting the

office seeking Terry’s help revising her resume.

Poor: Ambiguous Pronouns

-

The inspector told the electrician that he made a mistake.

Better: Clear

+ The inspector said, “I made a mistake.”

+ The inspector told the electrician, “You made a mistake.”

+ The inspector admitted to the electrician that he made a mistake.

+ The inspector accused the electrician of making a mistake.

Poor: Ambiguous Pronouns

-

The accountant sat at the desk and worked on her laptop PC. It was too
small.

Better: Clear

+ The accountant sat at the desk, which was too small, and worked on

her laptop PC.

+ The accountant sat at the desk and worked on her laptop PC, which

was too small.

OceanofPDF.com

Choose the Right Words

Take care to use words that do what you want them to do. Every word

has a history—a public history of how it has been used in the language,
a history in your profession, and a history with your audience. Use
words that accomplish your purpose.

As you tailor words to your readership, avoid tripping up your readers

by eliminating the following:

Words and phrases that suggest bias

Value laden words

Jargon

Ornamental and extravagant words

Cute words and phrases

Vulgar, crude, and coarse language

Overly informal speech, slang, and dialects

Excessive use of abbreviations and poorly known acronyms

Archaic and obsolete words

Poetic expressions

Foreign words and phrases

Unorthodox spelling

Overly technical words (when simpler words will do)

The following sections amplify this list.

Steer Clear of Gender Bias

The following examples illustrate methods of writing in a gender-

neutral manner, when it is necessary to describe a non-specific person
or to avoid bias.

Poor: Gender Specific

Better: Gender Neutral

The company mailed each employee The company mailed checks to all

his check.

employees.

The employee should contact her

Employees should contact their

supervisor.

supervisors. / You should contact

The employee should contact his

your supervisor. / The employee

supervisor.

Poor: Gender Specific

Better: Gender Neutral

should contact his or her

supervisor.

Each secretary can contact her

Contact your supervisor.

supervisor.

businessman / businesswoman

professional / manager / executive

chairman

chair

man hours

hours / labor hours / labor /work

hours /shifts

manmade

fabricated / manufactured

/synthetic / artificial

policeman

officer / police officer

spokesman / spokeswoman

spokesperson / representative

workman

worker

Also, be aware of bias concerning age, race, sexual orientation, and

disabilities. Here are examples.

Potentially Biased

Less Biased

handicapped

disabled

culturally deprived /

minority

culturally disadvantaged

the aged / old people / senior

persons over 65 years of age

citizens

men / women / males / females

persons / people / individuals

beginner / unskilled worker

new employee / recently hired

person

There are times when specific reference to gender or race are

important, even required. So, do not eliminate precision in your
writing, but use respectful terms.

Note that with some publications, it has become popular to use only

feminine pronouns. While this is appropriate for material written for

women, when writing for both men and women, it is best to use gender-

neutral pronouns.

Some authors switch back and forth between masculine and feminine
pronouns when the gender is non-specific. This creates needless

confusion. Even using the clumsy he/she or his/her works better,
although superior solutions exist, such as changing singular nouns to
plural forms and using the pronouns they, them, and their.

Avoid Value Laden Words

Consider a person, who is upset, who rants the following: “Overnight it
became a real problem! Everybody who was anybody was there! It was
criminal!” In this example, even simple words like real, problem,
everybody, anybody, and criminal take on value. Avoid using value-laden
words in any form in your writing.

What makes a word value laden is how the word is used. The same

word in another context can be fine.

Avoid Jargon

Jargon is a special term defined in terms of a specific activity, group,
or profession. Jargon often is appropriate when communicating within a
group, but problems arise when special terminology is used with the

public. It is fine for a geologist to write the following when
communicating with other geologists and mining engineers:

The structure includes intrusive and extrusive igneous rocks

derived from a common magmatic source. The quartz porphyry is

veined with quartz and orthoclase.

Nevertheless, this passage is ill suited for most other readers.

Avoid Extravagant Words

Some articulations exhibit a superfluity of sesquipedalia. Neglecting to
circumvent the plethora will discombobulate even the most ardent

bibliophile’s cerebral cortex.

Avoid Cute Words and Phrases

In business writing, avoid cute words, such as mommy, tummy, itsy bitsy,
gee whizz.

Avoid Profane, Crude, Vulgar, Suggestive, and Coarse Language

This will avert needlessly offending readers.

Avoid Overly Informal Writing, Slang, and Dialects

Yous got that?

Avoid Excessive Use of Abbreviations and Poorly Known Acronyms

Here is an example of excess acronyms relating to the US National

Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (NEPA):

Not all FAs require a full EIS. Some require EAs first. The finding of
the EA determines whether an EIS is required. If the EA indicates NSI,
then the LA can release a FONSI and carry on with the PA. Otherwise, the
agency must conduct an EIS. Some FAs avoid the EA and EIS, if

they meet the CATEX.[17]

Environmentalists and lawyers might understand this, but few others

do. So, steer clear of acronyms for general business writing, unless
they are widely understood.

Avoid Archaic and Obsolete Words

Verily, thou shouldst harken to this gardyloo.

Avoid Overly Technical Words When Simpler Words Will Do

Do not write hyperpyrexia, when fever will do, unless you are a
physician or pharmacist.

Avoid Poetic Expressions

Poetry and verse surely serve for wonder and grace,

But beware if poetry finds space in the business place.

Avoid Foreign Words and Phrases

Use foreign words in business writing only if they are essential to

understanding. If you are writing about a situation in a foreign
country, it may be appropriate to use foreign words. However, if you are
writing about common ideas, then use common English words. In other
words, no

escribas en español and n'écris pas en français.

Avoid Unorthodox Spelling

If you question the spelling of a word, consult a good dictionary (such
as Wiktionary) or do a Google or Bing search using the word plus the
word define or definition. You can find more advice in the spelling
section in the

following chapter, which discusses step 7.

OceanofPDF.com

Subordinate Less Important Details

Successful business and technical writing requires communicating a lot

of facts. Doctors, lawyers, engineers, scientists, accountants,
analysts, and sales people need to convey abundant, detailed
information. This section shows how to provide details without
overwhelming readers.

In the same way that an artist creates depth perception by painting

close objects larger and in greater detail than similar objects that are
farther away, good writers emphasize some details more than others. This
creation of perspective holds true at the document level and continues
down to the sentence level. Creating this hierarchy of sentence elements
is call

subordination.

Use Clauses to Subordinate Less Important Facts

One method to subordinate less important facts is to place less

important ideas in dependent phrases. The following conjunctions often
signal subordinate clauses: after, although, as, because, before, how,
if, since, so, unless, until, when, where, while, why. Pronouns that can
function to create subordinate clauses include: that, what, which, who.
Both conjunctions and subordinating pronouns signal sentence structure,
and in this way, they guide the reader.

Here are examples of subordination.

Poor: No Subordinate Clauses

-

A schedule for the postponed startup of the new equipment is a

concern of the members of the board due to the potential to weaken

profits by reducing throughput.

Better: Subordinate Clauses Used

+ A schedule that postpones startup of the new equipment is a concern of
members of the board, since the reduced throughput will weaken profits.

+ The members of the board are concerned a schedule that postpones
startup of the new equipment will weaken profits, because this will
reduce throughput.

Poor: No Subordinate Clauses

-

The need at the company for more space caused by steady growth in

staff and more computer equipment required a request by

management for an addition to the office.

Better: Subordinate Clauses Used

+ Management requested an office expansion, because steady staff growth
and additional computer equipment had outstripped available

space.

Note the large number of prepositions in the sentences that lack

subordinate clauses and the fewer number of prepositions in the rewrites
that include subordination.

Poor: No Subordinate Clauses and Many Prepositions

-

A schedule for the postponed startup of the new equipment is a

concern of the members of the board due to the potential to weaken

profits by reducing throughput.

Better: Subordinate Clauses Used

+ A schedule that postpones startup of the new equipment is the board’s
concern, since the reduced throughput will weaken profits.

No Subordinate Clauses and Many Prepositions

-

The need at the company for more space caused by steady growth in

the staff and more computer equipment required a request by

management for an addition to the office.

Better: Subordinate Clauses Used

+ Management requested an office expansion, because steady staff growth
and additional computer equipment had outstripped available

space.

So, one way to recognize sentences that may need subordinate clauses

is to look for prepositions.

The most common prepositions are: at, by, for, from, in, of, on, to,
with. These nine words are used 90% of the time when a preposition is

present. Other single-word prepositions include: aboard, about, above,
across, after, against, along, alongside, amid, among, around, as,
aside, astride, atop, before, behind, below, beneath, beside, besides,
between, beyond, but, concerning, despite, down, during, except,
excluding, failing, following, given, including, inside, into, like,
minus, near, next, notwithstanding, off, onto, opposite, out, outside,
over, past, per, plus, regarding, round, save, since, than, through,
throughout, till, times, toward, towards, under, underneath, unlike,
until, up, upon, versus, via, within, without, worth.

While most prepositions are single words, some prepositions include

two or three words. Just a few examples are: according to, ahead of,
because of, close to, due to, as well as, in case of, in front of. Most
multi-word prepositions include one of the common short prepositions in,
of, and to. You can find a longer list at:

en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_English_prepositions.

Good writing does not completely eliminate prepositional phrases, but

it does keep them to a modest level.

Writing that weighs all ideas equally, and which abounds with

prepositions, is called catalogical writing; in other words, details are
listed like entries in a catalog. On the other hand, writing that
subordinates less important sentence elements is called analytical
writing. In this usage, analytical implies an intricate linking of words
and ideas, rather than just listing them.

Use Noun Adjuncts to Subordinate Less Important Facts

Another technique for subordination is to transform independent nouns

into noun adjuncts. Noun adjuncts are nouns that modify other nouns.

Here are examples.

Independent Nouns Nouns Adjuncts

Linked with

Prepositions

member of the board board member

equipment for

computer

computing

equipment

addition to the office

office addition

Independent Nouns Nouns Adjuncts

Linked with

Prepositions

schedule for

installation

installation

schedule

Although some noun adjuncts offer word economy, this technique

should not go to the extreme, such as the following.

Excessive Noun Adjuncts

- water supply tank level evaluation

- hurricane disaster homeowner policy rider

- excavation permit application delay

- trip motor transformer investigation report summary

- heart valve operation equipment technician

Use Adjectives to Subordinate Less Important Facts

A third approach to subordinating ideas is to change prepositional

phrases into adjectives. Here are examples.

Poor: Prepositional Phrases

Better: Adjectives

the late schedule /

the schedule for startup at a later date

the delayed schedule /

the late-startup schedule

concern of the board

board's concern

a large number of shareholders

many shareholders

circumstances of interest

interesting circumstances

In summary, replace prepositional phrases with dependent clauses,

noun adjuncts, and adjectives. This can transform flat, categorical
writing into analytical text, which your readers will understand better.

OceanofPDF.com

Emphasize What Is Important

Good writing uses the following techniques to emphasize what is

important:

Location in a document – what comes first and what comes

last naturally receive emphasis – therefore, place what is

important at the beginning and/or at the end of documents,

sections, paragraphs, lists, and sentences

Repetition – summarize key concepts in the introduction,

discuss them in the document body, illustrate them with tables

and figures, and summarize them again in the conclusion

Allocation of space – provide more words, sentences, or

paragraphs to discuss what is most important

Details – supply more details to important points

Contrast – cause one idea to standout by including it with a

group of contrasting ideas that are similar to one another but

different from the idea to be emphasized

Climatic arrangement – write in such a way to build suspense

and introduce the most important idea as a climax

Capitalization, bolding, italics, underlining, larger font size,

different font style, highlighting, and color—use these

mechanical elements to draw attention to the important points

In any sentence, the most emphatic positions are the main independent

clause, the subject of the independent clause, and the end of the
sentence.

OceanofPDF.com

Use Active Voice

Voice describes the relationship between a sentence’s subject and verb.

When the subject acts, the sentence is active voice. On the other hand,
when the subject receives action, it is passive voice. Passive voice
generally includes a form of the to be verb— is, are, was, were—and a
past participle. The following examples illustrate passive and active
voice.

Poor: Passive Voice

-

The agency’s comments were being evaluated by the company.

Better: Active Voice

+ The company evaluated the agency’s comments.

Poor: Passive Voice

-

The time to drill a new well is estimated by the manager to take 3
weeks.

Better: Active Voice

+ The manager estimates it will take 3 weeks to drill a new well.

Poor: Passive Voice

-

It was reported that a revised report was submitted.

Better: Active Voice

+ The clinic reported it submitted a revised report.

+ The clinic submitted a revised report.

Poor: Passive Voice

-

It was encouraged to follow the policy of the company.

Better: Active Voice

+ The company encouraged employees to follow policy.

+ Company policy encouraged obedience.

Poor: Passive Voice

-

Critical business information is stored in a special file directory.

Better: Active Voice

Better: Active Voice

+ The department stores critical business information in a special file
directory.

+ A special file directory stores critical business information.

Poor: Passive Voice

-

The by-pass circuit was removed by the electrician.

Better: Active Voice

+ The electrician removed the by-pass circuit.

In addition to the to be verb, get and become can form passive voice, as
the following examples illustrate.

Poor: Passive Voice

-

If the wire should get broken, the signal would become distorted.

Better: Active Voice

+ If the wind breaks the wire, the damage will distort the signal.

+ A broken wire will distort the signal.

Poor: Passive Voice

-

The syringe was gotten rid of by the nurse.

Better: Active Voice

+ The nurse disposed of the syringe.

Poor: Passive Voice

-

The boy got hit.

Better: Active Voice

+ The ball hit the boy.

Some situations require passive voice. For instance, when those

performing action are unknown or unnamed, you may need to use passive

voice. For example: “The office was painted last week. ”

Another use is to avoid assigning responsibility or sounding critical.

For example: “The keys were lost.” Instead of: “James lost the keys.”

A third use is to control focus, such as the following example.

Poor: Active Voice (Focus split between child and mother)

-

What is the name of the child whose mother gave birth to him this
morning?

Better: Passive Voice (Focus maintained on child)

+ What is the name of the child who was born this morning?

In the prior example, active voice creates a ping-pong focus; that is,
the sentence focuses first on the child, then on the mother, then back
on the child; while the passive sentence keeps the focus on the child.

Regarding the control of focus, some people have argued that the

second of the following two sentences is better when the writer wants to
focus on the cat by making the cat the subject of the sentence: The dog
chased the cat. (active voice)

The cat was chased by the dog. (passive voice)

However, the argument ignores the option of making cat the subject of
the sentence and using active voice as illustrated by the following
sentence: The cat fled from the dog. (active voice)

Generally speaking, recasting passive voice into active voice cures

other problems with poorly drafted sentences. This occurs, because most
of the time active voice:

Improves the flow of ideas

Provides more information, by identifying the doer of action

Emphasizes the doer of action, by making it the subject of the

independent clause

Creates more energy

Improves understanding

Active voice increases comprehension, because the human mind wants

to know who did what, and active voice immediately makes clear who did

what. This enables readers to read active voice faster. And faster
reading conveys the genuine feeling that the material is clear and easy
to read.

However, (as shown before) if active voice diverts focus away from what
is

important or creates a ping-pong focus, then balance the advantages of
active voice against its weaknesses.

The important thing is to be aware of voice and use it effectively.

OceanofPDF.com

Make Positive Assertions

State what is—do not state what is not. When expressing negative

information, you often can find a simple word to replace a combination
of words that start with not or without. This provides economy and
enhances reader comprehension. Here are examples.

Poor: Negative Assertion

-

The technician did not pay any attention to the written procedure.

Better: Positive Assertion

+ The technician ignored the written procedure.

Poor: Negative Assertion

-

The adjuster did not include the water damage.

Better: Positive Assertion

+ The adjustor excluded the water damage.

Poor: Negative Assertion

-

She left the report without completing it.

Better: Positive Assertion

+ She left the report incomplete.

Poor: Negative Assertion

-

The purchasing agent did not have any confidence in the supplier.

Better: Positive Assertion

+ The purchasing agent distrusted the supplier.

Poor: Negative Assertion

-

The error was not important.

Better: Positive Assertion

+ The error was minor.

In spite of this admonition to avoid negative statements, there still
are many instances where negative words ( no, not, neither, nor, never)
work best. For example:

We can’t go.

There is no excuse.

No one will attend.

The judge did not decide.

It never snows in Singapore.

OceanofPDF.com

Place the Most Important or Complex at the End

Place what is most important at the end of a phrase or sentence, as

shown in the following examples.

Emphasizes “total agreement”

+ The manager reported to the board that the committee was in total

agreement.

Emphasizes “the board”

+ The committee that was in total agreement reported to the board.

Emphasizes “important questions”

+ The manuscript is a little disorganized, but it answers important

questions.

Emphasizes “disorganized”

+ The manuscript answers important questions, but is a little

disorganized.

When elements in a list have equal importance, place the longest or

most complex item at the end. For example: life, liberty, and the
pursuit of happiness.

OceanofPDF.com

Proceed from Known to Unknown

Introduce a topic before commenting on it, and reference what is

known before discussing what is new or different. This enables readers
to absorb ideas, because they slot the new information into their
existing web of knowledge. Here is an example of referencing what is
known before

proceeding to what is new:

I know you like green apples, and I believe you also will like the

tart taste of these plums.

One way to progress from what is known to what is new is to:

1. Start with a phrase such as “As you are aware”

2. Follow it with what the reader knows

3. Signal the new information with a word such as therefore,

consequently, however, but

4. Introduce the new or contrasting information

OceanofPDF.com

Keep Related Words Together

Keep associated words together. Here are examples.

Poor: Related Words Separated

-

The corporation proceeded with the investment to expand the factory to
manufacture a key component for $ 150,000,000.

Better: Related Words Kept Together

+ The corporation proceeded with the $150,000,000 investment to expand
the factory to manufacture a key component.

Poor: Related Words Separated

-

The machinist gave gaskets to the apprentice with neoprene lining.

Better: Related Words Kept Together

+ The machinist gave gaskets with neoprene lining to the apprentice.

+ The machinist gave the apprentice gaskets with neoprene lining.

Poor: Related Words Separated

-

The vendor sold the hydraulic drive to the company without a

motor.

Better: Related Words Kept Together

+ The vendor sold the hydraulic drive without a motor to the company.

OceanofPDF.com

Use Parallel Construction to Discuss Similar Ideas

Express similar ideas using similar construction. This helps the reader
rapidly absorb your ideas. This is important when listing activities,
such as in a report or plan. Here are examples.

Poor: Different Construction

-

Last week the planner’s activities included:

Working with Simmons to get pricing for the IP

project.

Sue will check the fleet cost.

The two light vehicles have damaged windshields.

Service is due for the grader.

Reviewed the invoice from CP Equipment.

Better: Parallel Construction

+ Last week the planner:

Worked with Simmons to get pricing for the IP

project.

Asked Sue to check the fleet cost.

Arranged windshield repairs for two light vehicles.

Scheduled service for the grader.

Reviewed the invoice from CP Equipment.

Poor: Different Construction: Sentences in one paragraph using

differing verb tenses

-

I am working with Simmons to get pricing for the IP project. Sue

will check the fleet cost. The two light vehicles have damaged
windshields. Service is due for the grader.

Better: Parallel Construction: Sentences in one paragraph using

consistent verb tense

+ I am working with Ray to price the IP project. Sue is checking the
fleet cost. We are arranging to repair the two vehicles with damaged
windshields. We are planning to repair the grader.

Parallel forms also improve individual sentences, as shown by the
following examples.

Poor: Different Construction

-

I am concerned with his being late, and he did not prepare.

Better: Parallel Construction

+ I am concerned he was late and unprepared.

Poor: Different Construction

-

It was both a difficult assignment and tiring.

Better: Parallel Construction

+ The assignment was difficult and tiring.

Poor: Different Construction

-

The company’s having experienced employees, a project portfolio,

which is large, and making a lot of money from investments enabled

the company to compete effectively.

Better: Parallel Construction

+ The company’s experienced employees, extensive project portfolio,

and successful investments enabled the company to compete effectively.

Poor: Different Construction

-

Career success comes from being at the right place during times that

are good and being recognized as not causing trouble.

Better: Parallel Construction

+ Career success comes from being at the right place at the right time

doing the right things.

Poor: Different Construction

-

The project is under budget, and it is taking less time than forecast.

Better: Parallel Construction

+ The project is under budget and ahead of schedule.

Occasionally, you may want to repeat the same preposition or other

words in a series to create emphasis. You will not want to over use this
device, but here is an example of its use.

Adequate Parallels

-

The stonemason laid the tile on the wall and floor.

Stronger Parallels

+ The stonemason laid the tile on the wall and on the floor.

When multiple sentence elements (phrases and clauses are long), the

technique illustrated above can prove useful. For example:

To prepare to deliver a presentation, before you speak, relax

your body by taking several deep breaths, by stretching your arms and
legs, and by slowly moving your head from side to side and nodding up
and down to stretch the muscles in your neck.

In summary, parallel writing improves readability. In fact, parallel

writing can make words truly memorable, as demonstrated by these famous
quotations:

“Ask not what your country can do for you; ask what you can do for your
country.” — spoken by John F. Kennedy, written by Kennedy in conjunction
with his speechwriter Ted Sorensen

“... we here highly resolve that these dead shall not have died in vain—

that this nation, under God, shall have a new birth of freedom—and that
government of the people, by the people, for the people, shall not
perish from the earth.” — Abraham Lincoln

OceanofPDF.com

Use Different Constructions for Variety and Development Always using the
same words or the same type of sentences can prove

monotonous. To improve interest:

Use synonyms

Use pronouns

Structure sentences differently

Vary sentence and paragraph length

The following example uses synonyms and pronouns to provide

variety.

Use of Synonyms

+ The crew began the excavation at 6 AM, with the team consisting of

five employees. They commenced their work by cutting into the concrete.
As this activity progressed, the workers brought in a backhoe to scoop
out the broken material. The next step involved

the laborers digging a 5-foot trench paralleling the pipe …

Only your imagination and keeping your sentences within reasonable

limits of length and complexity should limit your innovation. Rather
than using many short sentences, consider forming some longer sentences
that subordinate less important details as dependent clauses and/or
phrases.

Here are examples.

Short Monotonous Sentences

-

I was concerned. He was late. He did not prepare. It made a

difficult assignment more complex. This consumed precious time.

Longer Sentences Subordinating Ideas

+ I was concerned that he was late and unprepared, because this made

a difficult assignment more complex, thus consuming precious time.

Short Monotonous Sentences

-

The company employs many experienced people. The project

portfolio is large. Various investments make a lot of money. The

company competes effectively.

[]

[]

[]

Longer Sentences Subordinating Ideas

+ The company competes effectively, because it has many experienced

people and possesses a large portfolio of profitable investments.

As already stated, from time to time, you will want to construct

different sentence structures. Most sentences follow one of the
following patterns (or any combination of the patterns, if the sentence
is a compound sentence).

Here are examples that illustrate alternative patterns. However, be

careful to keep your sentences sounding natural.

Subject | Verb

+ A boulder lay by the road.

Verb | Subject

+ By the road, lay a boulder.

Subject | Verb

+ The company prospered.

Verb | Subject

+ Thus, prospered the company.

Subject | Verb | Object

+ I investigated his performance.

Object | Subject | Verb

+ His performance I investigated.

You also can introduce variety by beginning sentences with: Adverbs –
example: Suddenly, the mill exploded.

Adverb clauses – example: Although the account was closed, the firm
still refunded my money.

Prepositional phrases – example: At the close of the market, the company
stock reached a new high.

Participial phrases – example: Anticipating a slow buildup of

pressure, the control room operator placed the reactor on

standby.

Conjunctions – example: We discussed all the comments made

on the prior report, resolved concerns, and obtained

agreement. But, we did not make an action plan.

Appositives – example: A unique approach, whistle-stop

promotions achieved much media attention.

In conclusion, add variety. Just do not get so cute that you create

confusion or lose credibility.

OceanofPDF.com

Check the Sound

For writing to be intelligible, it should sound natural. The best way to
test for unaffected flow and clarity is to hear your words. You can do
this by reading it aloud, by asking someone else to read it aloud, or by
using software to read it aloud.

Text Readers

Text-to-speech readers are powerful tools for improving your writing.

Good text readers include:

Microsoft Office’s built-in reader called Speak in older

versions and Read Aloud in newer versions

Natural Reader by NaturalSoft Ltd., www.naturalreaders.com,

$100-$200

Balabolka by Cross+A, www.cross-plus-a.com/balabolka.htm,

free

Most smart phones and many electronic tablets also have built-in text

reading capability.

OceanofPDF.com

Use Transitions

When checking the sound of your writing, look for transition words

and phrases connecting sentences and paragraphs. If they are missing,
add them. Transitions signal the directional flow of ideas. They clue
readers to: Arrangement – above, below, beside, in front of, ahead of,

after, behind, following, …

Timing – before, after, at the time of, simultaneously, weeks

before, months after, …

Logical relationships – consequently, however,

notwithstanding, since, therefore, thus, …

OceanofPDF.com

Fix Capitalization and Punctuation

Correcting capitalization and punctuation are part of both the editing

and the proofing processes. For the sake of simplicity, the next chapter
discusses capitalization and punctuation.

OceanofPDF.com

Attend to Page Layout and Design

In addition to the topics discussed, give attention to the document’s

page layout and design. That is, check:

Titles and headings

Page size, page layout, and page numbering

Columns and margins

Quotations

References, footnotes, and endnotes

Positioning, naming, numbering, and formatting of tables,

charts, graphs, photographs, diagrams, and text boxes

Bullet and numbered list styles

Font selection, font size, kerning (the horizontal space

between letters), vertical line spacing, and fonts for emphasis

and strength

A big part of succeeding with document page layout is being

consistent. It helps to develop or borrow a standard and follow it.
These standards are called style guides.

The other essential ingredient to getting the design correct is
investing the time to check and fix all the small details. This takes
patience and diligence. Yes, it is work. But, it is work that pays
dividends, because a well-written document, free of errors, and
consistently formatted shows respect for your readers. Furthermore, it
fosters their reciprocal esteem for the author and for the institution
that the author represents.

OceanofPDF.com

Practice

Practice is indispensable to learning how to edit. You learn by doing.

Start with where you are now and determine that you will improve at
least one aspect of your writing. Perhaps it is to write shorter,
simpler

sentences. Maybe it is to use more active voice. Perchance it is to

subjugate ideas. Whatever it is, get started and go from one technique
to the next. In time, the techniques will become second nature. And,

gradually—but ever so surely—your skill as a writer will grow.

OceanofPDF.com

Summary

Keep your readers in mind as you edit. Keep asking, “Will they

understand this?”

Keep sentences and paragraphs short and effective.

Use short words, but do not slavishly avoid long words and technical

language if they provide precision and clarity.

Subordinate less important information.

Strive to eliminate passive voice.

Make positive assertions.

Use parallel construction when presenting similar ideas.

Eliminate confusing pronouns, emotional expressions, bias, and

misused words.

Keep related words together.

Practice. The more you write and rewrite, the stronger your skills will
become.

OceanofPDF.com

Your Personal Plan

What will you do to simplify your writing?

What are the three most important editing principles that can improve
your writing?

On your next writing assignment, apply two of the techniques from this
chapter to improve your document. Do this by making two passes

through the document, with each pass focusing on one principle.

OceanofPDF.com

Additional Resources

For videos and more information on revising, go to:

www.toweringskills.com/7steps/more/.

OceanofPDF.com

[]

[]

Step 7 – Proof

Have you ever spent a lot of time proofing a report, thought it was

finally done, and sent it out, only to learn later that it contained
stupid and embarrassing errors?

Even simple errors can make you look bad. Mistakes of any type

diminish your credibility. Writing errors are similar to carrots covered
with dirt from the garden—the carrots are nutritious, but no one is
willing to eat them until the dirt has been washed off. In a similar
way, when you fail to correct annoying errors, you are going to turn off
readers.

An old saying goes, “Check everything twice.” This is especially true
when proofing an important document. In fact, twice might be only

half enough.

OceanofPDF.com

Determine the Right Amount of Proofing

A document’s purpose helps determine the appropriate amount of

proofing. Something you write for yourself may need little if any
proofing, but documents intended for others require some rechecking.
Even a short text message you prepare on your phone can benefit from a
quick reread

before you press “send.” Meanwhile, long, complex, business documents

require thorough and systematic proofing, especially if the audience is
fussy.

OceanofPDF.com

Give Yourself Time

If possible, let your document set for at least 30 minutes—overnight is
even better. Setting your writing aside will clear your mind and help
you view your document with a fresh perspective when you return to it.
You will find more errors and see better ways of saying things.
Consequently, you will produce a better product.

When budgeting time to produce a long document, schedule adequate

time for thorough proofing.

OceanofPDF.com

Take a Sequenced Approach

With many aspects to consider, it helps to proof systematically. Sweat
over the big things first. Then move to smaller details. Do not waste
time carefully proofing spelling and fine tuning punctuation if whole
sections of the report are redundant or awkwardly phrased. Do major
deletions and

heavy rewriting before fine-tuning.

This does not mean that you cannot correct an error as you see it, but

you should make multiple passes through a document looking for

fundamental errors first. Consider using this punch list for making

corrections:

1. Substance

2. Logic

3. Organization

4. Transitions

5. Word choice

6. Grammar

7. Spelling

8. Capitalization

9. Punctuation

10. Overall visual appearance

Substance

Does the piece provide readers what they need? Do you address all the

important issues? Do you provide sufficient details? Will your message
evoke the response you desire?

Logic

Is the logic sound? What can you do to make the reasoning easier for

your readers to follow?

Organization

Is the document well organized? Do the parts fit together to build a

whole message? Do the elements follow one another in the best sequence?

Transitions

Do your ideas flow naturally? Did you use transitional phrases and

words to link sentences and paragraphs?

Word Choice

Do your words create the right tone? Are your words clear, precise,

and vivid?

Grammar

Is the grammar correct?

Spelling

Are the words spelled correctly?

Capitalization

Does capitalization adhere to common practice or to your style guide?

Punctuation

Is the punctuation appropriate?

Visual Appearance

Is the document aesthetically appealing? Are the headers, footers,

titles, and section headings attractive and consistent? Are figures and
tables clear? Are line spaces and margins consistent? Does the document
balance white space, text, and images?

OceanofPDF.com

Read Aloud

At some point in the correction process, you should read the document

aloud. Nothing helps more to identify problems in logic, flow, and word
choice than vocalizing or hearing the text.

Even better than yourself reading aloud the document, is using text-to-

voice software to hear the text. This not only helps you evaluate your
logic

and flow, but it also helps immensely to spot wrong words or words left
out.

OceanofPDF.com

Print or Reformat the Document

Some people find it helpful to print a document and read it from paper.

Another approach is to temporarily reformat the document in a different
font or change the number of columns and then proof it.

OceanofPDF.com

Get Help

When possible, enlist a family member, friend, or colleague to read the
document with an eye for content. Ask them to point out unclear ideas,
lapses in logic, and awkward phrases. Later, ask another person—one with
a skill for finding small errors—to proof the document for spelling and
punctuation.

If you are a non-native speaker of English, obtain the help of a native
English speaker. If time allows, work together with one person reading
the document aloud and the other looking at the printed text.

If you do not have access to a native English speaker, use translation

software to pass the text back and forth between English and your native
language. Draft in English. Then use software to translate your English
draft into your native language. See how it reads. Correct the document
in your native language. Then use the software to translate your
document back into English and compare the retranslation with your
original English composition. This can help you spot nuances that you
missed in your draft.

This is an imperfect process, but it can prove helpful when you do not
have access to a person fluent in both languages.

If you want to improve your ear for English, establish a practice of

daily oral reading. This, coupled with listening to electronic media,
will help train your mind to create natural sounding English prose.

OceanofPDF.com

Track Changes

When working with other people, it helps to use a redlining feature to

keep track of changes. To use Microsoft Word’s tool, go to /Review
/Track

Changes/. You can show revisions in-line or as balloons at the side of
the document.

OceanofPDF.com

Use Spelling, Grammar, and Style Checking Software

The software products for checking spelling, grammar, and writing

style are indispensable tools. They cannot catch all errors, but these
apps recognize many problems and offer many good suggestions.

Microsoft Word

The grammar and style checker built into Microsoft Word is excellent.

You activate grammar checking with the F7 key or the command: /Review

/Spelling & Grammar/. To gain access to its full power, execute the
command: /File /Options /Proofing /When correcting spelling and

grammar in Word/, then turn on the following features:

Check spelling as you type

Use contextual spelling

Mark grammar errors as you type

Check grammar with spelling

Show readability statistics

In the /Writing Style/ selection box, you can select either: Grammar
Only

Grammar & Style

You will obtain the most help if you select Grammar & Style.

From the /Settings/ link, you can customize your experience choosing
from a large number of grammar and style options. Microsoft Word

defaults with the style options turned off. I recommend turning the
style option on so you can have more tools to critique your writing.

Readability Indexes

If you select /Show readability statistics / as an option, Microsoft
Word will generate word counts and scores for:

Portion of sentences using passive voice

Flesch Reading Ease

Flesch-Kincaid Grade Level

As discussed in the prior chapter, passive voice generally is harder for

readers to understand.

Rudolf Flesch (1911-1986) developed the Flesch Reading Ease

evaluation; and he and J. Peter Kincaid (1942-) created the
Flesch-Kincaid

Grade Level index. Both systems use word length and sentence length to
measure the difficulty of understanding text. Shorter sentences and
shorter words increase the Reading Ease score, but decrease the Grade
Level score.

The maximum Flesch Reading Ease score is 120. Young readers

readily understand scores of 80 to 100, while very mature readers only

understand scores of 0 to 30. Thus, higher scores are better, because
they represent easier to read text.

On the other hand, the Flesch-Kincaid Grade Level scale goes in the

other direction: lower scores are better. Flesch-Kincaid Grade Levels
match US school grades 1 to 12. With very short sentences and
monosyllabic

words, it is possible to obtain Flesch-Kincaid Grade Level scores below
zero, while scores above 12 are possible with very long sentences and
long words.

Readability statistics are very useful. You will improve your writing by
keeping the Flesch-Kincaid Grade Level and the passive voice score low.

Other Grammar-Checking Software

If you feel you need additional help with grammar and style checking,

consider one of the many stand-alone grammar-checking programs. Some

are free, while others are quite expensive.

While grammar-checking programs are helpful, they do not replace an

understanding of grammar, vocabulary, and effective writing styles.
Blindly following the advice of grammar checkers—even the best—can still
lead to foolish mistakes. So, use them, but keep alert to problems they
fail to spot.

OceanofPDF.com

Obtain More Spelling Help

English spelling is difficult, because the language absorbed many

words from many other languages, experienced numerous changes in

pronunciation, and now uses different ways of spelling.

Internet Search Suggestions

When challenged by a difficult to spell word, use an internet search

engine. By default, Google, Bing, and Yahoo provide hints and auto-

completion. Just start typing a few of the letters in the search box and
often you will find the illusive spelling. (If your Google page fails to
show suggestions, sign in and change the preferences at:

www.google.com/preferences.)

Also, if you question the spelling of a word, perform a search with the
word in question accompanied by adjacent words from your composition or
by words of similar meaning. Generally, the browser will suggest the

correct spelling, and the search results will verify if the word means
what you think it does. This can distinguish words that are confusing,
such as bare and bear.

Online Dictionaries

Other tools are online dictionaries. The easiest to use are those built
into Google and Bing. Just type the word in question preceded or
followed by the word define or definition. These integrated dictionaries
are far better than most other online dictionaries, because they are
free from distracting advertising.

If you need a more detailed dictionary use Wiktionary. It is thorough,
fast loading, and free of advertising.

OceanofPDF.com

Watch Out for Words People Confuse

Spell-checking software usually cannot detect words spelled correctly,

but used inappropriately. Such mistakes must be recognized by a human

being who thoroughly understands the language and reads every word. You
need to be aware of words that often get confused and watch for their

presence. This book’s Appendix explains most of these troubling words.
If you will familiarize yourself with the list, you will be better
prepared to detect them and avoid misusing them.

OceanofPDF.com

Capitalization

Typically, you will use capital letters for:

The first word of sentences and quoted sentences.

Proper nouns, which include names for specific persons,

organizations, and places.

Abbreviations of words that are capitalized, such as US, UK,

EPA, IRS, GM, Mr., Mrs., Ms. , but not abbreviations of words

that normally are not capitalized, such as ft (feet), mm

(millimeters), mph (miles per hour), e.g. (exempli gratia, for example).

The pronoun I and all contractions that contain it, such as I’m and
I’ll.

Creative works: books, short stories, poems, plays, songs,

record albums, movies, CDs, DVDs, art works, non-common

games, and courses of instruction. Only capitalize articles ( a,

an, the), conjunctions ( and, or, but), and short prepositions if they
are the first word of a title, such as A Man for All Seasons

or The Good Earth.

Important events and eras, such as Christmas, Early Medieval

Period, Paleozoic Era.

The words President and Prime Minister when referring to a specific
chief government leader.

Titles that precede proper names, such as Congresswoman

Pelosi, Senator Goldwater, General Grant.

There is no need to capitalize professional titles. For example:
vice-president, general manager, sales representative.

Some style guides and editorial policies call for capitalizing all
names, pronouns, and synonyms for God, such as Master, Savior, Redeemer,
etc.

This convention was nearly universal in the 19th Century and early

20th Century, but the current trend is to use less capitalization for
pronouns and synonyms of deity.

Capitalize only those words that truly need capitalization. There is a
tendency in American business to capitalize more words than necessary.

Generally, this reduces reading speed, and that reduced reading speed

signals to the brain that the material is more difficult to comprehend.

Therefore, to keep your readers reading quickly, minimize capitalized

words, while still capitalizing the words that require it.

Science and engineering have standards for capitalizing scientific and

engineering units. The most common standard is the International System
of Units (SI). A description is at:

en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_System_of_Units.

The US Government Printing Office Style Manual

(www.govinfo.gov/app/details/GPO-STYLEMANUAL-2016) is another useful

guide to capitalization.

Last of all, AVOID ALL CAPITALS, even for document titles or

headings. Using all capitals dramatically slows reading and suggests the
writer is SHOUTING.

OceanofPDF.com

Punctuation

This section summarizes the best practice for punctuation.

A period (.) indicates the end of a sentence or the end of many (but not
all) abbreviations. In all English speaking countries, except the US and
Canada, the period is called a full stop.

During the approximately 100 years when much written material was

prepared on typewriters with uniform type width, the best practice to
end a sentence was to place two character spaces after the period,
question mark, or exclamation mark that ended a sentence. This helped
readers spot the end of sentences. When typewriters gave way to word
processors and

variable-width fonts, the practice of using two spaces at the end of

sentences declined.

Then, during the 1990s, the developers of Hypertext Markup Language

(html), which is the code use by the World Wide Web, configured the code
to ignore extra spaces. To show more than a single character space on a
webpage, a person needs to add special characters (such as the non-break
space) or use other html code. This was extra work, and consequently,
most web content stopped using double character spaces at the end of
sentences.

This is how html continues to behave. So now, most people use only

one space at the end of a sentence.

In spite of this shift to a single space, evidence shows that using two
spaces at the end of each sentence is better. Clinical tests reveal that
the added space improves reading ease for nearly all readers and
increases

reading speed for some people.[18] This is why this book is typeset with
two spaces after each period. Every little thing you can do to improve
your readers’ experience is worth the effort.

With email, Microsoft Word, Google Docs, and other word processors,

it is still possible to display multiple character spaces just by typing
the space key multiple times.

Periods often appear at the end of abbreviations, such as Mr. , Mrs. ,
Ms. , etc. and the use of initial letters for proper names, such as J.
K. Rowling.

Some style guides use periods for abbreviations, such as U.S. , U.K. ,
and E.U. , while others dispense with periods, such as US, UK, and EU.

Commas (,) separate items in lists, set off clauses, and set off words
that interrupt flow. Much more could be said about how to use commas,

but this is enough to get started. Consult Wikipedia or a style guide
for the

intricacies of comma use.

A semicolon (;) joins two independent clauses, when a conjunction is
absent; this sentence is an example of this use. In addition, you can
use semicolons to separate items in lists, especially when the elements
each contain commas; in this instance, semicolons become “super-commas.”

Some people dislike semicolons, finding them too formal; however,

there are occasions when nothing works better than a semicolon to
connect two independent clauses when the ideas are closely related. A
dash can serve the same purpose, and it has a modern feel. Be aware of
prejudices and regulate your use of semicolons and dashes according to
your readers’

preferences.

A colon (:) starts a list, sets off information, or separates numbers
used in groups, such as:

Ratios. Example: 3:1, meaning the ratio of three to one Time. Examples:
3:35 PM and 17:23:00 UTC

Book citations. Examples: Genesis 1:27, indicating chapter 1

and verse 27; Encyclopædia Britannica (11th edition) 9:587, indicating
volume 9, page 587

A colon also can join two independent clauses when the second clause

repeats or expands the idea from the first clause. Example: She went to
town: she rode her bicycle into the village.

Book titles often use colons to separate the main title from the
subtitle.

Example: Blink: The Power of Thinking Without Thinking.

Some style guides use a colon to separate locations from publishers

when providing publisher information in bibliographies, footnotes, and

endnotes. Example: Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

A hyphen (-) joins two words used as one. Instances of its use include:
Words used as a single adjective. Examples: one-trick pony,

black-eyed Susans, multi-functional feature

Number followed by a unit of measure when used as an

adjective. Examples: 5-ton truck, 12-pound hammer

Compound numbers. Examples: twenty-one, fifty-seven

thousand

Potentially confusing prefixes and suffixes. Examples: John

re-covered the leaky roof. The organization is semi-

independent.

Span of numbers or letters. Examples: 1939-1945, A-Z

Dashes (– and —) set off words or phrases—they add emphasis or provide
more information. Commas or semicolons serve the same purpose, but
dashes provide greater clarity, especially if a sentence already has
commas. The two types of dashes are:

Short dash, called en dash (–), which:

Indicates an abrupt change in thought – like this

Sets off an appositive

Marks a span, such as 1939–1945

Long dash, called em dash (—), which:

Indicates an abrupt change in thought—like this

Sets off an appositive

Sets off the source of a quotation

Standard keyboards do not have dashes. To add them to documents, do

one of the following:

Select the short or long dash from a list of special characters or

symbols (for example, in Microsoft Word they are found at:

/Insert/ Symbols/ More Symbols/ Special Characters/)

Generate a dash by using a computer numeric keypad to enter

one of the following numbers while holding down the Alt key:

0150 to obtain a short dash

0151 to obtain a long dash

When using Microsoft Word:

Obtain a short dash by typing a word, a space, one or two

hyphens, a space, another word, and a space

Obtain a long dash by typing a word, two hyphens,

another word, and a space

Sometimes you will see two (or even three) hyphens used to indicate a

dash when the dash symbol is unavailable.

While short and long dashes both set off an appositive or signal an
abrupt change, be consistent throughout a document.

For more information on dashes see: en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dash.

Parentheses ( () ) set off additional information, which is secondary in
importance.

A question mark (?) ends a question.

An exclamation mark (!) indicates strong feeling. Technical and business
writing should use exclamation marks seldom, if ever.

An ellipsis (…) shows the omission of words. Much informal writing on
the internet and some sales material overuses or incorrectly uses
ellipses to try to provide emphasis, continuity, or informality. Use
this punctuation mark sparingly; otherwise, you will reduce your
credibility.

An apostrophe (’) marks the omission of letters to form a contraction,
and it indicates a possessive form of a noun. Examples of contractions:
can’t, don’t, I’ll, they’ll. Examples of possessives: Martha’s,
Samuel’s, Congress’s, dog’s, dogs’.

Many older style manuals recommend adding only an apostrophe

(without the letter s) after words that already end in the letter s
(such as James’, Charles’, Augustus’), but this practice is giving way
to a more consistent use of the characters ’s after all words ending in
the letter s (as in James’s, Charles’s, Augustus’s).

The possessive form of the word it, which is its, drops the apostrophe
so as not to be confused with the contraction of it is, which is
rendered it’s.

For more information on apostrophe see:

en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Apostrophe

en.wikipedia.org/wiki/English_possessive

Quotation marks (“ ” and ‘ ’) indicate quoted material or emphasized
words. In many settings, overuse of quotation marks for emphasis also

reduces your “credibility.”

The following table summarizes punctuation norms.

Mark

Use

.

Period

Ends a sentence.

Ends some abbreviations.

,

Comma

Separates items in lists.

Sets off clauses.

Sets off words that interrupt flow.

;

Semicolon

Joins two independent clauses.

Separates items in lists when elements contain

one or more commas.

:

Colon

Starts a list.

Sets off numbers.

Joins two independent clauses when the

2nd clause repeats or expands the idea from the

1st clause.

-

Hyphen

Joins two words used as one word.

Joins a number to a unit when used as an

adjective.

–

Dash

Sets off and emphasizes words or phrases.

—

( ) Parenthesis

Sets off and de-emphasizes words or phrases.

?

Question

Ends a question.

Mark

!

Exclamation

Indicates strong feeling.

Mark

… Ellipsis

Shows the omission of words.

’

Apostrophe

Forms possessive or contraction.

‘ ’ Quotation

Indicates material quoted.

“ ” Marks

Shows emphasis.

When writing a sentence that includes a website address (URL),

continue to use the appropriate punctuation. Even if the URL ends a

sentence, include punctuation. In all cases, if the URL is created as a
hyperlink, configure the link to exclude the punctuation, and display
the punctuation directly following the link, such as that seen in the
following paragraph.

You can find more information on punctuation at:

en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Punctuation.

OceanofPDF.com

Visual Appearance

Each document should provide a consistent and pleasing look. Pay

attention to the following features.

Line Justification

Ensure that vertical and horizontal line justification is consistent.
Left justification is best for most business writing. Aligning material
to both left and right margins generally is reserved for highly formal
publications.

Headers and Footers

Ensure that headers and footers are consistent, appealing, and provide

information to help your readers.

Footnotes and Endnotes

Be consistent with footnotes and endnotes. Commonly used standards

include:

AMA Manual of Style, www.amamanualofstyle.com

(subscription required)

Chicago Manual of Style, www.chicagomanualofstyle.org/

(subscription required), examples are at: write-

site.athabascau.ca/example-footnotes-chicago.php

Oxford Guide to Style, (free download) b-

ok.cc/book/734690/6f0a3a, replaced by New Hart’ s Rules,

global.oup.com/academic/product/new-harts-rules-

9780199570027

US Government Printing Office Style Manual, chapter 15,

www.govinfo.gov/app/details/GPO-STYLEMANUAL-2016

Line Breaks

Prevent lines of text from breaking in the wrong place. For instance,

numerical values and their units should stay connected and not break
across two lines. Examples: 3 meters, 5 feet, 104 degrees. If two
elements like this want to break across two lines, you can force them to
stay together by replacing a normal space with the no-break space
character. To obtain this special character do one of the following:

Select the no-break-space symbol from a list of special characters (such
as with Microsoft Word at: /Insert/ Symbols/

More Symbols/ Special Characters/)

When using Microsoft Word, simultaneously type the control,

shift, and space keys

Enter 0160 on the numeric keypad while holding down the

Alt key

In a similar fashion, prevent hyphens that tie numbers to units from

breaking across two lines. Examples: 100-kph speed zone, 10-pound

hammer. To prevent a line break after the hyphen, use the no-break

hyphen character. To obtain this special character:

Select the no-break-hyphen symbol from a list of special

characters

When using Microsoft Word, simultaneously type the control,

shift, and hyphen keys

Enter 8209 on the numeric keypad while pressing the Alt key

OceanofPDF.com

Summary

Determine the appropriate level of proofing. Carefully scrutinize

documents that will reach a wide or discerning audience.

Let your documents age before doing the final proofing.

Use a process to systematize proofreading. Use spelling and grammar

checkers, but be aware that they cannot correct every problem. Also,
avail yourself of text reading software to detect mistakes.

When possible, get help from another person.

OceanofPDF.com

Your Personal Plan

What will you do to improve your proofing skills?

On your next writing assignment, use a text reader to proof your

document.

Analyze several of your documents using readability statistics. What
percentage of your sentences used passive voice? What were your

Flesch-Kincaid grade level scores?

OceanofPDF.com

Additional Resources

For more information about proofing, go to:

www.toweringskills.com/7steps/more/.

OceanofPDF.com

Application – Preparing Informative

Documents

This chapter discusses how to use the 7-step writing process to prepare
informative (that is, non-fiction) documents.

I still recall the apprehension I felt 40 years ago when asked to
evaluate a complex business problem and write a report recommending
action. I had recently taken a new job as a young engineer at a large
copper mine in

Arizona. The manager asked me to examine the economic viability of two
lime-burning kilns. He explained the company had decided to close a

leaching plant, which consumed most of the lime from the kilns. Senior
management needed to know what to do with the kilns. A take-or-pay

contract supplying additional lime complicated the question.

I knew little about the lime business and less about economics. Yet, I
had been assigned to find out what needed to be done and make a

recommendation. The decision represented several million dollars per
year and affected about 20 people, who operated the lime burning plant
and the quarry supplying limestone to the kilns.

I felt trepidation not knowing how to start my investigation. How was

I going to collect data, analyze it, and make a recommendation? I wasn’t
sure.

Nevertheless, I started asking questions and collecting data. Eventually
I figured out how the company could minimize its expense. I wrote it up
in a report. The manager was happy with the results. And boy was I
relieved when I heard that he was satisfied.

Each new assignment to generate a report or make a presentation

reminds me again that the way to overcome the angst of not knowing much
about a new writing project is to get started. If you begin and keep

working, everything eventually falls into place.

To help you begin some of those scary writing assignments, this

chapter provides advice. You will find tips on how to prepare the

documents most often required in business and other real-life
situations.

OceanofPDF.com

Email

Email is the most prevalent type of informative writing. Surveys show

that office workers typically spend 30% of their time reading and
writing email.

Determine Your Purpose and Identify Your Readers

As previously discussed, before you begin writing, identify your

readers and understand the purpose of your communication. Decide if

email is the right media.

Would it be better to make a phone call or send a text message? People
will immediately read a text message—but this is less likely with an
email.

On the other hand, a phone call provides instant feedback, more privacy,
and greater flexibility, if the other person answers the phone. The
downside of using the phone is many people fail to pick up or return
phone calls.

Also, remember, email is never private. Assume that people other than

your original recipients will someday read your email. In addition, an
email server will retain a copy forever. If you need privacy, use the
phone or talk face-to-face.

Add “To” and “Copy” Names Last

Wait to add the names of your readers to the “To” and “Copy” fields

until after you write the message. This prevents sending the email

prematurely.

Focus on One Topic

If you need to discuss several different subjects, send separate emails.

Moreover, if your email provides different information for different

recipients, consider sending separate emails with only the material
relevant to each person.

Summarize Your Message in the Subject Field

Add a concise and meaningful subject line. This helps readers

determine the importance of the message. Give them a reason to open your
message. Remember that many business people receive as many as 100

non-spam emails each day. So help them see immediately that your email
is worthwhile.

Make your subject as clear and as precise as possible. The subject line:

“Staff meeting, 2:00 PM Monday, to discuss next year’s budget, ” is
better than “Important upcoming meeting.”

Do not fill the subject line with the words Important, Priority, Read
Immediately, etc. Rather, say what is important, such as “Registration
closes tomorrow at 5:00 PM.”

Realize that excessively long subject lines are hard to read. From the
Inbox view, smart phones truncate long subject fields, making it more

difficult to understand an emails’ purpose. Remember many email

programs sort messages by trends, which key off the subject line.

Furthermore, research shows that limiting the subject field to 7 words

improves opening rates and engagement. Finally, consider how you or

others will search for your message later.

Use Appropriate Salutations

For formal situations, use the common opening salutations: Dear

Mr./Ms./Mrs. For formal closing salutations use: Cordially, Sincerely,
Warmest regards, etc.

For more informal occasions, such as when addressing colleagues, use

first names for opening and closing salutations. When repeatedly

exchanging emails with close colleagues, you can drop salutations

completely.

If in doubt, error on being more formal.

Identify Yourself

When sending an email to a person who does not know you, identify

yourself. At the beginning of the message, start with something like,
“Dear Ms. Anson, I am Joan Pearson. Susan Zumwalt suggested that I write
you

…” Then at the end of the email, provide a text block with your name,
position, company, mailing address, physical address, office phone
number, cell phone number, and/or website.

Indicate If Action Is Required

State in the first paragraph if the reader needs to respond or if you
are providing the email only as information. Place requests early in the

message, and restate your requests at the end of the message.

Be Concise, Direct, and Polite

Use as few words as possible to provide the information requested or to
ask for the help needed. Brief emails help recipients save time. In

business, do not ramble or chitchat.

Be direct, but polite. Use a respectful, kind tone. People are more

likely to respond to a pleasant request.

Never express anger in an email—it can come back to haunt you.

When addressing conflict, refocus the conversation on constructive

solutions.

When you receive a message that you feel is harsh or demanding, ask

for clarification. You might write, “What did you mean when you said …?
”

or “I’m not sure how to read this. ”

Do not prematurely take offense. Give others an opportunity to clarify
their request or position. If possible, use the phone to take their
comments or hear their problems. If necessary, refer complaints to
persons whom the opponent respects or who has power to resolve problems.

Provide Context

When responding by email, include statements such as, “As you

requested last Thursday, concerning the product launch planned for June
5th, here are suggestions who should attend.”

Be Clear

Use short words, short sentences, and short paragraphs.

Use active voice as much as possible.

Use a simple, easy-to-read font.

Use mixed case. Do not use all lower case—it looks sloppy. In

addition, do not use all upper case—it implies you are shouting or

commanding. Especially in business, using all lower or upper case
conveys laziness.

Use only abbreviations and acronyms that your readers readily
understand.

Consider adding a simple table and/or chart with a brief explanation to
summarize long, attached reports.

Organize Your Message

Break long email messages into sections. If you see that an email will
run more than a few hundred words, consider replacing it with a

memorandum or report.

When providing complex answers, place elements in bulleted or

numbered lists.

Add Attachments Only If Necessary

Avoid attachments if you can efficiently insert the information into the
email body. There is no need to send a large attachment if the reader
needs only a small part of the document.

Do not send attachments unless they are specifically required.

Attachments consume bandwidth, take time to open, require time to read
or scan, and introduce security risks. Time-conscious and
security-conscious readers will avoid or delete messages with large
attachments. Also, realize that attachments often do not display well on
mobile devices.

When needing to send many files or several large files use a file

hosting service, such as Google Drive or Microsoft OneDrive. You can
find

a list of the more popular file hosting services at:

en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comparison_of_file_hosting_services.

Proofread

Carefully proof your email before sending it. Check the subject field to
ensure your subject line summarizes the message and provides a reason
for your readers to open the email. Activate spell-checking and
grammar-checking features. Reread the message to ensure that you did not
leave out words. If the email is highly important, have other persons
review the email before sending it.

As already noted, add the recipients after the message is written and

proofed. Double-check the recipients’ field. Make sure you do not

inadvertently send the document to a wrong person. Include only those
recipients who need to know. And when you want recipients’ names and

email addresses to remain confidential, add recipients to the blind copy
field.

Manage Email

Here are further suggestions regarding email:

Respond promptly. When you receive a request for assistance,

if you are too busy to help within a few hours, respond

promptly by saying that you cannot help immediately and state

a time when you can get to their request.

When a person asks for free advice or free work that you

cannot provide gratis, tell them politely that you cannot help

them, and if possible, suggest an alternative solution, such as

offering to do the work for a fee or suggesting another

resource.

Use email folders and email automation software to organize

incoming email.

To save time reading and responding to email, use the

following procedures:

Last in first out (LIFO) – read the last received email first

Handle only once (HOO) – after reading an email, delete it, forward it
to another person to handle, respond to it, or

set it aside to handle later (only doing this for messages

that you cannot delegate and that require much time)

OceanofPDF.com

Letters and Memos

The precursors to email—letters and memos—although used less often,

still have a place. Letters and memos are useful when you need to

physically deliver a message or create a stand-alone document.

Generally, you will use memos to communicate within an

organization. Memos assume the readers will be familiar with the writer
or unconcerned as to the identity of the writer. Therefore, you do not
need to introduce yourself in a memo as you would in an email or letter
written to someone who does not know you.

Most memos include fields for the subject, date, recipients ( To),
writer ( From), and message. They typically have less than 1,000 words.
Longer memos are possible, but once they get past 2 pages, a report
usually will better serve the purpose. Best practice is to start long or
moderate length memos with a summary and end with a conclusion.

Normally, you will send letters to individual persons. The recipients

can be within or outside of the sending organization. Letters take a
wide range of content and format and can be any length.

Formal letters typically start with a block of text providing contact

information. This is followed by the date and an introductory salutation
( Dear Mr./Ms./…). Formal letters end with a closing salutation (
Sincerely/Cordially/…), the writer’s signature, name, and title.

Much of the advice provided for emails applies to composing letters:

Identify yourself at the start when writing to someone who

does not know you

Indicate if action is required

Be direct, but polite

Provide context

Be concise and clear

Organize your message with section headers if the letter is

longer than one page

OceanofPDF.com

Reports

To keep enterprises going, managers divvy the firm’s work among

individuals, teams, and external service providers. The deliberations of
these workers, their analyses, solutions, and plans find their way into
reports.

Organizations also use reports to record decisions. This compensates

for the inability of different people to remember things exactly the
same. In this way, reports align institutional knowledge. If no one
collects the facts and describes the analysis, the investment in
collecting data and studying problems is wasted.

One more point—organizations prepare reports to communicate

consistently with their customers and stakeholders.

Determine the Purpose and Identify Readers

When starting to write a report, assess the report’s purpose, context,

and readership. Determine the general length and complexity of the
report.

Decide on a format. Determine if you have sufficient information to

commence work. If needed, lay out a research plan and/or get other
people to help with the research and writing.

Get Started and Keep Going

As you begin, manage your emotions. It is natural to feel overwhelmed

when assigned to write a long or complex report. Needing to enlist the
help of other people from other departments or other companies can
heighten

your uneasiness, since enlisting others increases uncertainty of the
timing, quality, and cost of their involvement.

When faced with a difficult report to write, it is best to jump in and

start doing something as soon as possible. As you do, your feelings will
change from being overwhelmed to being resigned to see the project

through. And as you make measureable progress, your confidence will

grow and you will acquire a hope that the assignment will turn out well.

Your growing knowledge and enthusiasm will propel you through the

project.

Obtain Guidance

You seldom are without a guide when writing a report. Whoever

assigns or requests a report is your sponsor. Often this person is your
manager or other person in charge.

When assigned a report to write, gain as full an understanding as

possible of what is wanted. Do this by asking questions and taking
notes.

As you advance your assignment—when your research reveals new

things or when your brainstorming and organizing yields insights—check

back with your sponsor to gain his or her guidance.

Invite your sponsor’s advice when working outside your prior

experience, facing contradictory and incomplete evidence, or dealing
with weighty and emotionally charged situations. He or she likely will

understand context important to your report.

Be Ethical

It is implicit that you write honestly.

Refrain from guessing. Carefully research your topic. Consult credible
sources. Document where you found supporting information. State

limitations to evidence. When drafting and revising, include only
validated data and relevant information. Present objective conclusions.

If you hedge the truth, you and your organization eventually will suffer
the consequences for compromising your integrity.

Brainstorm, Organize, and Assemble Pre-existing Material

When you feel your research has answered the important questions,

brainstorm the major ideas and organize your material into an outline.

Next, bring together any text that you have already written that can be
reused. Using two windows on a PC, copy sections from the already

written material into the outline of the new report. This technique also
works well when assembling text written by multiple authors.

Collaborate

When appropriate, get help from other people. Working with others

can be challenging and time consuming, but it is imperative when writing
a long and complex report.

It helps if one person manages the project and the same or another
person takes the lead to assemble and wordsmith the entire document. The
project manager or document editor should:

Clearly communicate the scope, schedule, and budget of the

assignment

Define roles for the team members, including assigning

portions of the document to team members according to

contributors’ expertise

Establish an overall outline for the report

Adopt standards, such as:

A style guide – a document that prescribes how things will

be written and formatted

A list of abbreviations and units of measure

A glossary – a list of special words or terms used in the

document

Standards are essential to ensure consistency and to avoid excess

rewriting. Sometimes the chief editor will need to assume the role of

writing instructor and educate contributors on what is and what is not

effective prose.

Organize Your Material

After doing your research and brainstorming, decide how you will

organize your report. As discussed in a prior chapter, common
development

patterns include:

Chronology

Spatial

Logical

Lists

Problem solving

Proposed change

Templates specified by governments and trade associations

Select a relevant title. Add section headings. Include summary,

conclusion, and recommendation sections. Use bulleted and numbered

lists. Add tables, charts, illustrations, and photos. When appropriate,
provide a glossary, list of abbreviations, and list of information
sources.

For longer reports, add finding aides, such as a table of contents, list
of tables, list of figures, and/or index.

Use a minimum number of fonts. Ensure the overall document is neat

and consistently formatted.

After you draft your report, during the revision phase, cycle back to

check the effectiveness of the development pattern you selected and

consider resequencing sections.

When your report is essentially complete, but yet unissued, obtain

feedback by submitting a draft to your sponsor or to a sample set of the
intended readers to obtain their comments.

Implement Revision Control

When working on a complex report, add a revision label to the file

name and keep different versions. This is especially important when

multiple persons edit or review a document. An effective way to do this
is to add a revision letter or number to the end of the file name, such
as rev C

or rev 03. Use letters to indicate revisions prior to formally issuing
the document and numbers to revisions that follow the formal release,
with the first official issuance being revision 00 or edition 1.

Avoid using the label final as a revision indicator, because 99% of the
time what you or others think is the final revision will still require
further changes. When this happens, the final revision is no longer
final and this can create confusion. For this reason, numbers or letters
make superior revision labels.

OceanofPDF.com

Presentations

Learning to write can help you speak before a group. Successful

presentations, talks, speeches, sermons, lectures, and briefings—whether
given in person or recorded—require preparation. An effective
presentation is more than throwing together a deck of PowerPoint slides
and reading

from or talking to those slides. Rather, each good presentation starts
with a well-written script.

This does not imply that all you have to do is write out a great talk
and then read it in front of your audience. No. A great presentation
also requires rehearsing the presentation and refining the content and
the mode of delivery through practice and iterative adjustments. Without
writing out what you will say and practicing, you will never hear
beforehand your

words and assess their effectiveness.

Prepare Your Presentation

A speaker’s first mandate is to have something valuable to say. This

aligns with the first three steps of the writing process:

1. Get clear on your audience and your purpose

2. Collect material to support your premise

3. Brainstorm additional content

A speaker’s second mandate is to engage with the audience. This

requires preparing an opening that catches their interest and summarizes
the presenter’s message. Follow with substance that holds your
audience’s

attention and links to their needs and desires. Include stories, share
analogies, quote authorities, and cite facts. Prepare to do this by
using steps 3 through 6 of the writing process, namely:

3. Brainstorm how to effectively use your material

4. Organize your content to hold interest and drive home your

point

5. Draft what you will say and prepare what you will show

6. Refine what you will show and tell

Prepare a conclusion, which links back to your opening; and formulate

a call to action.

Along the way, double-check your facts and thoroughly proof your slides.

Prepare Suitable Visual Aids

When preparing your script, decide on your visual aids, if any.

Remember, what you will say and how you look will be far more important
than a slide deck or other visual material.

When you elect to use slides, ensure that they:

Present a clear message

Offer benefits to the audience

Economize on ideas and words

Present only one idea per slide

Include only the essential details

Include at most 6 lines per slide and 6 words per line

Use a large, easy-to-read font

Use simple charts or tables to show numbers

Employ larger font, bolding, or contrasting colors to

emphasize what is most important

Do not overemphasize slide titles by making them too big

Slides with long sentences and small fonts cause audiences to work too

hard. This stops them from reading such slides and from listening to the
presenter.

When you want people to remember your message and to act on it,

write a report or proposal. Deliver your presentation, and then hand out
the report or proposal. A written report will accomplish more to
encourage action and enable people to remember what you said than any
slide deck.

Moreover, a business proposal distributed at the end of a presentation
offers many opportunities for you and your team to follow up with your
audience.

Practice

Once you have finalized what you will say and show, rehearse your

presentation until you can present it naturally and with only a few
notes.

Your goal is to deliver it without reading it word for word. Rarely is
an improvised talk as good as a well-prepared presentation that is read;
but best of all is a well-prepared and well-rehearsed presentation.

Practice your presentation by standing up and reading your script aloud
again and again with the expression, tone, and body language you plan to
use. As you do, you will find portions of your presentation that need

changing. Some of your words and phrases will seem unnatural. Some of
your ideas will be unclear or weak. Improve them.

Spread out your practice. This will enable you to internalize your

material and ultimately deliver it with more confidence.

As you progress, bring in a colleague or two to critique your content

and presentation techniques. Be open to their comments and make changes.

Prepare for Questions

Anticipate questions from your audience, and write out answers. Keep

these in reserve until needed.

Control Your Emotions

When the time comes to deliver your presentation, relax. It is normal

to feel anxiety standing in front of a group of people. To control

nervousness, focus on your audience and your message. If you have

prepared a great message and practiced delivering it, you will be
confident.

And this confidence will show.

Be authentic. Present your genuine character and a true message.

Be charitable. Wish the best for your audience and for others.

Be vulnerable. Be open to questions and criticism.

Control Your Looks

Consider your dress, grooming, posture, facial features, eye contact,

and hand gestures.

How you look will influence your perceived authority, competence, and

humanity. As you walk on the stage or move to the front of a conference
room, your audience will size you up. They will judge your credibility
before you begin talking. So, consider your audience, as you select your
clothing and grooming.

In addition, maintain an upright posture and project a friendly face. To
prepare for this, before you speak, relax your body by taking several
deep breaths, by stretching your arms and legs, and by slowly moving
your head

from side to side and nodding up and down to stretch the muscles in your
neck. However, do this in private or inconspicuously.

When speaking in a conference room, stand up and move to the front of

the room. Do not stay seated in your chair. Do not lean against the
wall.

Do not sit on the edge of a desk or table.

Face the audience. Stand with the projector screen, white board, or

easel to your left. Use your left hand, with the palm open and facing
the audience, to point to important points on your visuals. Doing this
allows your audience to look at you and then sweep their eyes to their
right to your slides. This is the normal eye movement for speakers of
English and most other languages. (If you are presenting in Arabic,
Hebrew, Persian, or other languages where word flow is right-to-left,
stand on the opposite side of the presentation.)

When talking, if possible, move around in a natural way. Stand

straight, but not rigidly.

If using a podium, stand behind it, but do not touch it. Let your hands
hang loose. This prevents you from clutching or leaning on the podium.
In addition, it frees your hands so you can make hand gestures.

If not using a podium, also let your arms and hands extend to your

sides when not using them to gesture.

Smile—make it natural. You do not have to smile constantly. Rather,

smile from time to time, when your message indicates a smile is

appropriate.

Make eye contact. Effective eye contact conveys honesty and

authority. When standing before a group, look squarely at one person for
several seconds. Hold this eye contact until you complete a sentence.
Then move to another person. In a 10-minute presentation to 30 people,
you

should be able to look at every person several times. As you proceed,

bounce around the room—do not move person by person in a row as if

knocking down aligned dominoes. Obviously, if you are speaking to 100 or
more people, you cannot look everyone in the eye, but moving to
different parts of the room will convey the impression that you are
looking at

everyone.

When making hand gestures keep your hands at your chest or head

level so they are more visible.

Control How You Sound

Speak up. Provide volume, especially when on stage or in a large

room.

If using a microphone, arrive before your talk early enough so you can

test the best place to position the microphone stand or to hold the mic.

When public speaking, the best mic position is a few inches in front of
your mouth at a 45° angle. This enables the mic to capture your voice
while leaving the view of your face mostly unobstructed.

When testing a mic, have another person check the sound of your voice

throughout the room.

Speak distinctly. Annunciate every syllable.

As you speak, vary your volume to match the words. Increasing the

volume communicates authority, while reducing the volume generates a

feeling of intimacy or suspense.

Control the pitch of your voice. When you are nervous or excited, the

pitch of your voice naturally increases. To project confidence, relax
your voice and drop the pitch.

Vary your pace. Speak quickly to create excitement or when presenting

many details that are subordinate to your main point. Speak slowly when
you want to emphasize words and items. A complete pause of several

seconds can add huge emphasis.

Cut out uh, um, false starts, and other speech disfluencies. They kill
credibility. If you need to collect your thoughts, pause.

Control your tone by controlling how you feel. It is possible to speak
the same words but vary the tone to create a wide range of feelings—

spanning from joy to sorrow, sincerity to sarcasm, and excitement to

apathy. Do this by consciously feeling an emotion and then inflecting
your voice to match that emotion.

To be effective, you will need to practice these techniques when

rehearsing.

Other Tips

Arrive early at your venue. Use this time not only to check the

microphone and audio system, but also to get familiar with the room
and/or

stage. If appropriate, meet and briefly interact with a portion of the
audience as they enter the room.

After your presentation, if appropriate, linger and talk with those who
have questions or comments. This is a good way to make useful contacts.

OceanofPDF.com

Articles, Blogs, and Websites

Articles are vital to our lives. We read them to learn the news, to find
answers to questions, to solve problems, and to be entertained. They
occur as webpages, blogs, e-zines, newsletters, newspapers, magazines,
and

technical journals. We find them on line, embedded in email, and printed
on paper.

Today, if you want to be read, you need not be a prominent author, nor

represent a name brand. You need only to write something interesting and
place it before likeminded readers. However, writing well will increase
your readership and your influence.

Having Something to Say

Great articles begin with memorable ideas. For your material to

standout, it must be:

Relevant

Unique

Honest

Substantial

Readers find articles striking if the pieces solve their problems or

address their interests. To be relevant, your material must be
useful—even if the only use is to entertain.

Articles need to provide unique information. The ideas need to differ

from the knowledge readers already possess.

Your readers want to know that information comes from reliable

sources. Therefore, provide proof—share the results of studies, include
testimonials, and cite sources.

The information needs to be more than trivial. To have substance, your
pieces must address specific problems and provide step-by-step solutions
or they should address special interests in a substantial way. To find
their way into top-ranking search engine results, articles published on
the internet generally should be 2,000-5,000 words.

Select an Attention-Getting Headline

Start with a strong title that both captures readers’ attention and

summarizes the article. Typically, the title will include a short main
headline and a longer sub-headline.

Match the length of your title to your media and purpose. Research

shows the optimum title length for online articles is:[19]

Business-to-consumer (B2C) articles – 12-18 words

Business-to-business (B2B) articles – 6-12 words

Online newspapers – 8 words

Generally, titles of printed newspapers and magazines are shorter,

being 3-9 words. [20] With trade journals, some of the most
attention-gaining titles are as short as one word, especially when they
link to current events or topics with high interest.

Test what works for your situation.

In addition, research on internet articles shows that the first 2-3
words and last 2-3 words in a headline are the most important, because
they are

the words most often read when quickly scanned.[21]

Write It Well

Once you have selected memorable content and a strong headline, use

effective writing techniques to present the material. Use words that
your readers use to describe the topic. Generally, these words should
rank high for search engine optimization (SEO) for your topic.

Provide a strong first paragraph. Grab the readers’ attention. Then,

continue to hold that attention through the body of the article.
Finally, add a conclusion, enumerate recommendations, and make a call to
action.

Make sure that your logic is valid. Safeguard that your document holds
together by checking to see that every part contributes to the central

message.

Include stories and analogies to strengthen your premise. Add images

and media. But add only material that advances your purpose and provides
value.

Write in a familiar tone. Use short words, short sentences, and short

paragraphs. Strive to achieve a natural flow by adding words and phrases

to transition from one idea to the next.

Technical articles require a more formal tone, and they use larger and

more complex words, but they still should have a comfortable flow. When

writing technical articles, replace categorical writing with analytical
writing

and use active voice as much as possible.

Make articles visually appealing. Add headers throughout your

documents so readers can quickly scan for content. Use bulleted and

numbered lists. Use an easy-to-read font. Ensure that images, graphs,
and tables are consistently formatted. Provide white space.

Proof the document for missing words, punctuation, spelling, and

grammar.

OceanofPDF.com

Business Proposals

A business proposal or sales proposal is a written offer to provide a

service or product. Proposals are crucial to complex or high-priced
sales.

The length and complexity of a proposal varies with the cost and

intricacy of the offering. Proposals for simple services can be as short
as one or two pages, while proposals for large construction projects can
have hundreds of pages, often including many large volumes of
supplemental

information. Similar to other writing tasks, it is important to
understand the reader and the purpose of the proposal.

Sophisticated buyers typically provide requests for proposals (RFPs)

when bidding for work that is difficult to estimate or for work that
will be on going, and they typically provide requests for quotations
(RFQs) when seeking to buy a piece of equipment or contract a job that
is well defined.

Buyers generally award bids for well-defined scope primarily on price.

In contrast, awards for difficult-to-define scope stress professional

qualifications and the organizational fit to the buyer’s needs.

Unsolicited proposals differ remarkably from solicited proposals.

Unsolicited proposals attempt to awaken potential buyers to unrecognized
risks and unspotted opportunities.

Gather Information

Information gathering always precedes the preparation of a proposal.

Sales organizations gather information from the documents and
instructions buyers supply—requests for proposals, specifications, and
bid meetings—

and from talking with decision makers and with those who influence the

buying decision.

An effective proposal requires a thorough understanding of the
buyer’s: 1. Pain (the acknowledged problems)

2. Need for a solution

3. Estimate of the value of a solution

4. Assessment of an acceptable budget to obtain a solution

To be ethical, when receiving a solicitation for a proposal, providers
of goods and services can only gather information through formal
channels.

These include the request for proposal, documents appended to it,
pre-bid meetings hosted by the soliciting organization, and authorized
question-asking mechanisms.

On the other hand, informal or unsolicited proposals enable the

supplier to ask for information through many informal channels. When

anticipating an important solicitation, a supplier should talk to the
customer before the request for proposal is prepared. Through informal

conversations, the supplier should learn the answers to the four
previously listed items and quantified the value the buyer places on a
solution.

Examples of questions the supplier can ask to obtain this information

include:

What are the major issues challenging your organization?

Help me understand what you mean when you say your

organization “is failing to …”

What have you previously attempted to do to address this

problem?

What do you think you can do to eliminate this problem?

What are your criteria for a successful solution?

What other concerns do you have?

What concerns do others in your organization have?

What are the primary concerns of your management?

What does this problem cost you?

How much is this problem costing your organization?

What would it be worth to your organization if you could …?

If you could save a million dollars per year, what type of

budget would your organization be willing to commit to a

solution?

If you could achieve …, what would it be worth to your

organization?

What type of funding is available to address these

problems/opportunities/situations?

What would be the compelling reasons for senior management

to agree to a project that would …?

Who in your organization can approve this type of project?

What issues could sidetrack this type of project?

When asking questions, it is important for the seller to listen
carefully to the buyer. The insight obtained from truly listening to the
buyer and understanding his or her problems can provide the extra
perception to write a proposal that is more compelling.

The seller should gather this intelligence from both decision makers

and from technical experts who will evaluate the proposal in detail and
make recommendations to the decision makers.

Draft and Refine the Proposal

With this essential knowledge in hand, the proposal writer crafts an

offer that:

States the buyer’s objectives

Restates the value of achieving the objectives

Proposes a range of options to achieve the objectives—the

best practice is to offer three options, with the range including

low, mid, and high cost offers

Includes language and a signature acceptance field for the

buyer, so the proposal can serve as a purchase order or

contract

Follow the outline provided by the request for proposal, use a template
provided by your firm, or adopt one from the many available on the

internet. Format the document in a common font. Define sections with

headers for each. Include a table of contents. Describe key terms and
include a glossary if the document is long and the material is
complex—this will be useful to purchasing personnel and the ultimate
decision maker, who may be less familiar with industry jargon. Also,
clarify terms that you use in a unique way.

Use a cover letter and the proposal summary to pitch your solution to

the organization’s pain. Do not waste this highly visible part of a
report droning on and on about the extensive experience and sterling
qualities of your organization. Rather, focus on the buyer’s problems
and on your

proposal's ability to economically solve them.

Use bullet lists, tables, and charts to make your proposal clear,
concise, and readable. Use direct, but familiar language.

In the body of the proposal, describe in detail the buyer’s problems and
provide defensible evidence of the value of the proposed solutions.
Provide a detailed description of the service and/or products that you
will provide and how they address the buyer’s problems and issues.
Quantify the

resources and time needed to develop the solution. For complex proposals
this will include milestone dates, a project schedule (Gant chart), and
cost estimate or bill of materials that build to a quotation/budget.

Some proposals will provide budgetary estimates with payments linked

to actual costs, while other proposals will include lump-sum bids to do
all of the work described by the scope.

Describe the payment terms, such as “25% payment due on signing”

and “fee of 1% per month charged on payments made 30 days after

billing.” For large and complex projects, this language can be
extensive.

Prepare a Work Plan

Many buyers will prepare a written scope of work (SOW) to describe

the goods and services to fulfill a request for quotation (RFQ) or
request for proposal (RFP). The scope of work is a detailed list of
goods and services to meet the buyer’s objective. On the other hand,
less sophisticated buyers may communicate only verbally their
objectives.

The supplier translates the buyer’s objectives and the scope of work

into a project plan. Such a plan defines in detail who does what when

where how and why:

What services and/or products will be prepared and/or

delivered? This is the scope of work.

What resources (persons, departments, and subcontractors)

will do the work to build and deliver the services and/or

products?

When will the work begin and end? What are other milestone

dates? This is the schedule.

Where will the work occur and where will the services and/or

products be delivered?

How will the resources work to prepare the product and/or service? Who
will manage the effort? How will the supplier

ensure quality, timely delivery, and budget compliance?

Why are you recommending this range of solutions to the

customer? This is the justification.

Preparing this information for large projects typically requires project
management and professional cost estimating. A typical approach is to

create a work breakdown structure (WBS), which is an organization of the
project deliverables into smaller components. For instance, with the

construction of a building, there is the foundation, walls, roof,
piping, electrical, and painting. Within each group, there will be
further divisions, such as the foundation being divided into excavation,
forms, concrete, and reinforcing steel. This breakdown continues to
smaller and smaller

elements until each element is manageable as an individual work package.

Follow a Template

Sophisticated buyers typically specify in their request for proposals
the arrangement of proposal elements. Bidders should meticulously follow

such guidelines. When the buyers do not specify the content and format,
a good pattern is:

Cover letter

Summarize the buyer’s problems or the opportunities

available to the buyer.

State the value the solution or opportunity provides the

buyer.

Show how the supplier is uniquely qualified to provide the

most economical or most valuable solution. Briefly

mention similar problems you have solved for other

buyers.

Describe guarantees or other risk mitigation that will

minimize the buyer’s risks.

Make a call to action. Ask for prompt approval to

proceed.

Do not waste this space by talking excessively about your

company in an aggrandizing manner—rather focus on the

buyer’s pain (problems) and how you will provide relief (solutions).

Provide personal contact information so readers can reach

you immediately if they have questions.

Front material

Add a title page, table of contents, list of figures, list of

tables, and list of abbreviations.

Summary or executive summary

Write the summary similar to the cover letter.

Discuss the buyer’s problems or missed opportunities.

Summarize several options for addressing the problem.

Link the seller’s strengths to the buyer’s problems. In

addition, show that the seller can provide the best

solutions.

Summarize the project’s economics.

Create a compelling case for the buyer to move ahead

immediately with one of your proposed solutions.

Assessment

Describe the buyer’s needs and/or opportunities and the

value of a solution. Quantify the value of a solution.

Explain the context of the problems.

Discuss prior attempts (if any) to solve the problems and

explain why those efforts failed.

Solution/Plan/Project

Propose a range of solutions to the problems or concisely

describe the project.

Describe the work to be done. List deliverables and

delivery dates.

Offer alternatives.

Anticipate questions and objections from members of the

buyer’s team and include material that answers potential

questions and negates possible objections.

Schedule

Provide project milestones and a detailed schedule (if

appropriate).

Qualifications

Describe the delivery organization or team. Summarize

the supplier’s experience and capacity relevant to the

plan. Stress unique capabilities and strengths of your

organization or team. Link these strengths to the project.

Include profiles of key team members.

Budget/Pricing/Cost

Summarize elements of the scope and provide the cost for

each element.

Explain assumptions.

Economics/Cost-Benefit Analysis

List the project benefits, quantifying each item.

Compare the total financial value of the benefits to the

cost. If possible, provide discounted cash flow

calculations with common economic indicators—internal

rate of return (IRR), net present value (NPV), benefit-cost

ratio (BCR), and earnings before interest, tax,

depreciation, and amortization (EBITDA).

Conclusion

Restate the buyer’s problems or opportunities.

Restate the range of solutions.

Restate the advantages the seller possesses to provide the

solutions.

Restate the project economic benefits.

Provide a call to action. Ask for prompt approval.

Include a deadline stating when your proposal expires.

Terms & Conditions

Describe terms, conditions, and assumptions. Specify the

duration of the agreement, reiterate the overall timetable

for completion, specify payment dates and payment

methods, state how the proposal can be amended, etc. It is

likely that your supply or legal department will provide

this section.

Acceptance/Approval

Provide a field at the end of the document where the buyer

can sign and date the document and select solution

options. This will enable the supplier to begin work

immediately on the project, when the buyer signs and

returns the document.

Appendices

Add a detailed schedule.

Include a financial model used to estimate project

economics.

Provide background on the supplier’s organization, such

as similar past projects.

Attach resumes of key team members.

Proof

Carefully proofread the proposal. Pay especial attention to the bid

pricing, budget, and financial analysis. Ensure that repetitions of key
numbers are consistent throughout the document and the cover letter.

OceanofPDF.com

Summary

While there are many more types of informative writing, these are the

common ones. With each type of document, adequate prewriting, rapid

drafting, thorough rewriting, and careful proofreading will lead to
strong documents and solid results.

OceanofPDF.com

Your Personal Plan

What important documents are on your horizon?

How can you apply the principles from this chapter to improve what

you are writing?

OceanofPDF.com

Additional Resources

For videos and more information on preparing informative documents,

go to: www.toweringskills.com/7steps/more/.

OceanofPDF.com

Afterword

We live in the Information Age. Essentially an unlimited amount of

information is available to much of the earth’s population. In a world
becoming increasingly interlinked and data-rich, individuals and

organizations gain a competitive advantage by producing superior

documents. Not only do well-written documents help us communicate

more effectively, but the labor of writing and rewriting them helps us
think clearly.

As you seek to improve your writing, start with a proven writing

process. Advance one step at a time, learning and applying the skills to
everyday writing tasks. Whatever you write—emails, text messages,

reports, proposals, scripts, web pages, or blog posts—make them the best
you can.

Get clear about your readers and your theme. Collect the information

needed to support your position. Expand your thinking through

brainstorming. Make mind maps and outlines to organize your content.

Draft quickly. Edit for clarity, brevity, and a natural flow. Embrace
the full power of word processing and grammar checking. Enlist the aid
of an

electronic text reader. In summary, work hard at your writing so your

readers do not have to work hard at reading what you write.

Most of all, take pride in what you write. It reflects on your mind and
character. It is an important asset.

As you strive to write better, I wish you much success.

OceanofPDF.com

Your Personal Plan

What are you going to do to be a better writer?

OceanofPDF.com

Additional Resources

For additional writing tips see: www.toweringskills.com.

OceanofPDF.com

Appendix – Words People Confuse

This section lists commonly confused English words. It provides

pronunciations, explains differences in meaning, and shows examples of
the words used correctly. Many of these words are homonyms, that is,
words with the same sound, but different meanings.

Pronunciations are general American English and use the New Oxford

American Dictionary (NOAD) phonetic key explained at:

en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pronunciation_respelling_for_English. Both Google

and Bing use this phonetic key.

accent, ascent, assent

/ˈakˌsent/, /əˈsent/, /əˈsent/

As a verb, accent means to emphasize or give importance. As a noun,

accent is the stress given to certain syllables in spoken language.
Accent is also the mark used to indicate that stress. Ascent is a noun
meaning an upward journey. As a verb, assent means to agree. As a noun,
assent

means agreement.

Example: The captain placed a strong accent on the word “go” as he

commanded, “Let’s go!” This indicated his hearty assent to make an
ascent of the hill.

accept, except

/əkˈsept/, /ikˈsept/

Accept is a verb meaning to receive or to allow. As a verb, except

means to exclude. In addition, except is often used as a preposition or
as a conjunction to indicate exclusion.

Example: Joan will accept the assignment except task 3. She intends to
except herself from that portion of the project.

adverse, averse

/adˈvərs,ˈadˌvərs/, /əˈvərs/

Adverse is an adjective meaning unfavorable or contrary. Averse is an
adjective meaning having a strong dislike or opposition.

Example: Mary is averse to John’s plan, because she believes it will
have an adverse effect on morale.

advice, advise

/ədˈvīs/, /ədˈvīz/

Advice is a noun meaning counsel or a recommendation. Advise is a verb
meaning to recommend or to inform.

Example: Edward advised Joy to take the police officer’s advice.

affect, affect, effect

/əˈfekt/, /ˈafekt/, /əˈfekt/

Generally used as a verb, affect (/əˈfekt/) means to influence, to make
a difference, or to pretend. Affect (/ˈafekt/) is used only as a noun in
formal English as a technical term in psychology meaning a feeling or
emotion as distinguished from a thought. As a verb in formal English,
effect means to make, to do, or to accomplish. Generally used as a noun,
effect means a result or consequence.

Example: Adam’s statements will affect his children, who affect

indifference. This is the effect of his love. Hopefully, it will effect
peace.

aide, aid

/ād/, /ād/

Aide is a noun meaning a person who assists. As a noun, aid means help
or assistance; and as a verb, aid means to assist or help.

Example: The charity provides aid to those in need. In this context, the
chairman’s aide helped the refugee find the staff member empowered to
aid those with immigration issues.

all ready, already

/ôl ˈredē/, /ˌôlˈredē/

All ready is an adjective phrase meaning totally prepared. Already is an
adverb indicating before.

Example: Brian was all ready for the trip. In fact, he had already
saddled his horse.

all together, altogether

/ôl təˈɡeT͟Hər/, /ˌôltəˈɡeT͟Hər/

All together is an adjective or adverb phrase that means in a group.

Altogether is an adverb meaning totally or completely.

Example: The weekend spent all together proved altogether fun.

allusive, elusive, illusive

/əˈlo͞osiv,əˈlo͞oziv/, /ēˈlo͞osiv/, /iˈlo͞osiv/

All three words are adjectives. Allusive means indirect. Allusive is
related to the noun allusion, which means an indirect but meaningful
reference. Elusive means evasive or difficult to capture, find,
describe, or remember. Elusive is related to the verb elude, meaning to
evade or avoid.

Illusive means being deceived or believing in something unreal or
unreachable. Illusive is related to the noun illusion, which is
something that appears real, but is not.

Example: The solution to the differential equation proved elusive,

because the professor’s suggestion proved worse than allusive; in fact,
his hint was deceptive. Justifiably, the students felt deceived by his
illusive suggestion.

altar, alter

/ˈôltər/, /ˈôltər/

Altar is a noun meaning a sacred table or raised spot. Alter is a verb
meaning to change.

Example: The sign reads “Please do not alter the altar.”

among, between

/əˈməNG/, /bəˈtwēn/

Among is an adverb meaning in the company of a group. Between

generally is a preposition meaning at, into, or across the space
separating two (and only two) objects or places. Between also can be an
adverb with the same sense of separating two things.

Example: On her expedition in the Amazon, between the coast and the
river, the scientist found several new species among the many insects
she collected.

anecdote, antidote

/ˈanəkˌdōt/, /ˈan(t)iˌdōt/

Anecdote is a noun meaning a short, interesting story about a person or
event. Antidote is a noun meaning a medicine use to counteract a poison
or a similar intervention to improve a bad situation.

Example: The nurse told a charming anecdote of her administering an
antidote to a grouchy patient.

appraise, apprise

/əˈprāz/, /əˈprīz/

Appraise is a verb meaning to estimate the value. Apprise is a verb
meaning to tell or inform.

Example: Carla apprised the homebuyer that the appraiser would

appraise the house by the end of the week.

arbiter, arbitrator

/ˈärbədər/, /ˈärbəˌtrādər/

An arbiter is a noun meaning a person who resolves a dispute or who has
ultimate authority over a matter. An arbitrator is a noun meaning an
impartial person or organization selected to settle a dispute.

Examples: James disliked the arbitrator’s decision; therefore, he

reluctantly agreed to leave the outcome in the hands of God, whom he
regarded as the true arbiter of right and wrong.

a while, awhile

/əˈ(h)wīl/, /əˈ(h)wīl/

A while is a noun phrase meaning a period of time, while awhile is an
adverb meaning for a short period of time.

Example: Walk with me awhile. I need a while to adjust to your being
home.

bare, bear

/ber/, /ber/

As a verb, bare means to uncover or expose. As an adjective, bare

means uncovered or exposed. As a noun, bear is a large mammal of the
animal family Ursidae. As a verb, bear means to give birth, endure,
tolerate, support, carry, or turn.

Example: During the winter, when the chill wind has stripped bare the
branches of the oak trees, the she-bear will bear her cubs. Bear in
mind, for now, she is a solitary black bear, barely able to bear the
company of other members of her species.

berth, birth

/bərTH/, /bərTH/

Berth is a noun meaning a place to rest. As a noun, birth indicates the
start of life. As a verb, birth means to give life to a baby or young
animal.

Example: The seal gave birth to the pup on the rocky berth.

beside, besides

/bəˈsīd/, /bəˈsīdz/

Beside is a preposition meaning next to. Besides generally is an adverb
meaning in addition.

Example: Besides wanting a snack, Lucas wants to sit beside his

grandmother.

bolder, boulder

/ˈbōldər/, /ˈbōldər/

Bolder is an adjective meaning more confident, more vivid, or stronger.
A boulder is a noun meaning a large rock.

Example: The artist painted the picture in bolder colors, while he sat
on a boulder.

born, borne

/bôrn/, /bôrn/

Born is the past participle of the verb bear meaning to give birth. In
addition, born is an adjective indicating the existence because of birth
of a person, animal, or concept. Borne is a past participle of the verb
bear and means carried, supported, endured, or tolerated.

Example: Jane is a born optimist. She was born during April, when the
ice was borne away by the flooding river.

brake, break

/brāk/, /brāk/

As a verb, brake means to stop or to decrease the speed of motion. As a
noun, brake carries a similar sense of something that slows or stops.

Break as a verb means to divide or make unworkable. As a noun, break

means an interruption, discontinuity, pause, gap, or a sudden fortunate
opportunity. Break when used with helper words creates many idiomatic

expressions, such as, break away, break cover, break down, break even,
break in, break new ground, break off, hell breaks loose, break the ice,
break out, etc.

Example: Please break your habit of always braking so quickly. You are
wearing out my car brakes, breaking my patience, and letting all hell
break loose with the contents of my glove box. If you stop it now, I’ll
give you a break from my complaining.

broach, brooch

/brōCH/, /brōCH/

Broach is a verb meaning to raise a sensitive subject for discussion.

Brooch is a noun meaning an ornament fastened to clothing.

Examples: Maria broached the topic with her sister, telling her, “Your
brooch doesn’t match your earrings.”

canvas, canvass

/ˈkanvəs/, /ˈkanvəs/

As a noun, canvas is a strong, course cloth. As a verb, canvas means to
cover with a strong, course cloth. As a verb, canvass means to ask for
votes or to gather opinions. As a noun, canvass means the action of
asking for votes or gathering opinions.

Example: The politician canvassed the county seeking support. Often he
spoke from a canvas-covered platform attached to the back of an old
pickup truck.

censor, censure, sensor

/ˈsensər/, /ˈsen(t)SHər/, /ˈsensər/

As a verb, censor means to examine and to suppress unacceptable parts of
a letter, book, movie, or other written or recorded communication. As a
noun, censor is the person who examines and suppresses unacceptable
parts of written or recorded material. As a verb, censure means to
express strong disapproval. As a noun, censure is an expression of
disapproval. Sensor is a noun that indicates a device for detecting or
measuring physical

properties.

Example: The military officer censored the journal article, because it
revealed sensitive information concerning a night-vision motion sensor.

The officer also censured the author who wrote the article.

capital, capitol

/ˈkapədl/, /ˈkapədl/

As a noun, capital means the leading city of a state or nation, a sum of
money, the top of a stone column, or an upper case letter. As an
adjective,

capital means most important or serious. Capitol is a domed building or
group of buildings used for government.

Example: The US Senate meets in the Capitol, which is located on

Capitol Hill, this being an important neighborhood in our nation’s
capital and the center of huge capital spending.

choose, chose

/CHo͞oz/, /CHōz/

Choose is a verb indicating to select, where choose is the present tense
and chose is the past tense.

Example: Today I will choose buttermilk donuts. Yesterday, I chose
raisin muffins.

cite, sight, site

/sīt/, /sīt/, /sīt/

The verb cite means to quote or reference. The noun sight is something
seen, something worth seeing, or a person’s ability to see. The noun
site is a location.

Example: I cite the record, even though it originates from a site where
many people have lost sight of the truth.

coarse, course

/kôrs/, /kôrs/

The adjective coarse means large in size, rough in texture, or vulgar in
manners. The noun course means a path or plan, such as a course of study
or education. The phrase of course is an idiomatic adverbial phrase
meaning naturally, as planned, or as expected

Example: Of course, the history course describes the course followed by
the army, which included a highway covered with coarse gravel.

complement, compliment

/ˈkämpləmənt/, /ˈkämpləmənt/

Complement is a verb meaning to match or supplement. As a noun, it has
the same sense. Compliment is a verb meaning to praise or congratulate;
and as a noun, it has the same sense.

Example: Compliment your host, so that gratitude will complement

your humility.

conscience, conscious

/ˈkänSHəns/, /ˈkänSHəs/

Conscience is a noun indicating a person’s thoughts about right and
wrong. Conscious is an adjective indicating sensibility or awareness of
one’s surroundings.

Example: Jane was conscious that her conscience was free of worry.

consul, council, counsel

/ˈkänsəl/, /ˈkounsəl/, /ˈkounsəl/

A consul is a noun indicating an office of government. Council is a noun
indicating a group who confers together. Counsel is a noun meaning
advice or a person who gives advice, such as a lawyer or barrister.
Counsel

is also a verb meaning to give advice or talk with others.

Example: The German consul met members of the Council on Foreign

Relations seeking counsel to console the prime minister, who had been
alarmed by high-priced counsel.

datum, data

/ˈdādəm,ˈdadəm/, /ˈdadə,ˈdādə/

Datum is a noun meaning one piece of information, such as a number,
while data is the plural form of datum. Modern usage has grown to accept

data as a singular noun meaning a collection of facts.

Example: The data are correct, now that John corrected the bad

datum. This caused Mary to say, “The data is now OK.”

decent, descent, dissent

/ˈdēs(ə)nt/, /dəˈsent/, /dəˈsent/

Decent is an adjective meaning good or wholesome. Descent is a noun
meaning the action to go down or the origin of a person in terms of

genealogy or ethnicity. Dissent is a noun meaning disagreement.

Example: Smith is a decent fellow of German descent. However, he

expressed his dissent with the ruling, which allows descent of
commercial aviation to 5,000 feet over the city.

desert, deserts, deserts, dessert

/ˈdezərt/, /ˈdezərts/, /dəˈzərts/, /dəˈzərt/

As a singular noun, desert (/ˈdezərt/) means a dry place, and as a
plural noun, deserts (/ˈdezərts/) means several dry places, while
deserts (/də

ˈzərts/) means a person’s entitlement to punishment or reward. As a
verb,

desert (/dəˈzərt/) means to abandon. Dessert (/dəˈzərt/) is sweet food,
typically served at the end of a meal.

Example: While visiting the desert of Arizona, I ate a lot of frozen
desserts. Because I deserted (abandoned) my diet, I put on a lot of
weight, which was my just deserts (punishment).

device, devise

/dəˈvīs/, /dəˈvīz/

Device is a noun meaning a tool or instrument. Devise is a verb meaning
to prepare or fix.

Example: Please devise a device to help people eliminate this divisive
practice.

discreet, discrete

/diˈskrēt/, /diˈskrēt/

Both words are adjectives. Discreet means careful with what one says or
does. Discrete means separate or distinct.

Example: Diane used discreet language to describe the discrete events.

disburse, disperse

/disˈbərs/, /dəˈspərs/

Disburse is a verb meaning to distribute money. As a verb, disperse

means to spread out over a large area or throughout a large space. As an
adjective, disperse is the quality of being widely distributed.

Example: The controller disbursed the monthly payments to the

chemical lab, which was investigating how to better disperse oil in
water.

dominant, dominate

/ˈdämənənt/, /ˈdäməˌnāt/

Dominant is an adjective that means most important or influential.

Dominate is a verb meaning to exercise control or to be the most
conspicuous.

Example: The most dominant species dominate the habitat.

dual, duel

/ˈdo͞oəl/, /ˈdo͞oəl/

Dual generally is an adjective indicating two. Duel is a noun meaning a
formal match or fight.

Example: The duel served dual purposes: striking down the villain and
freeing the oppressed.

dyeing, dying

/ˈdīiNG/, /ˈdīiNG/

Both words are verbs. Dyeing means to apply a color through soaking in a
liquid. Dying means giving up or losing life.

Example: Your hair is dying, because you are dyeing it too much.

elicit, illicit

/ēˈlisət/, /i(l)ˈlisit/

Elicit is a verb meaning to cause or provoke. Illicit is an adjective
meaning illegal.

Example: Cheating can elicit other illicit activities.

eligible, illegible

/ˈeləjəb(ə)l/, /i(l)ˈlejəb(ə)l/

Both words are adjectives. Eligible means suitable. Illegible means
unreadable.

Example: The teacher told Jacob that he was not eligible for recess,
because his report was illegible.

eminent, imminent

/ˈemənənt/, /ˈimənənt/

Both words are adjectives. Eminent means prominent or important.

Imminent means soon to happen.

Example: The eminent astronomer predicted an imminent solar

eclipse.

ensure, insure

/inˈSHo͝or, enˈSHo͝or/, /inˈSHo͝or/

Both words are verbs. Ensure means to assure or reassure. Insure

means to financially protect.

Example: A person should ensure that they have insurance from a

sound company that insures against losses. When insurance companies
insure their clients against losses, they generate emotional security
among their clients, which ensures mutual success.

fair, fare

/fer/, /fer/

As an adjective, fair means equal, reasonable, or equitable. As a noun,

fair means a gathering to share merchandise or advice. Fare is a noun
meaning a fee or payment.

Example: The airline charged a fair fare for people attending the Biggin
Hill International Air Fair.

farther, further

/ˈfärT͟Hər/, /ˈfərT͟Hər/

As adjectives and adverbs, farther and further have the common meaning
of being at or extending over a greater distance. Further also

means additional or more advanced. And, as a verb, further means to
promote or to develop.

Example: The further I think on your advice, the more I am inclined to
further the argument that he should move farther away from the highway.

flaunt, flout

/flônt,flänt/, /flout/

Flaunt is a verb meaning to show off. Flout is a verb meaning to
disregard a rule or social convention.

Example: The maid flouted the house rules by taking a photo with her
smart phone of the actress flaunting a large pearl necklace.

forbear, forebear

/fərˈber, fôrˈber/, /ˈfôrber/

Forbear is a verb meaning to restrain an impulse. Forebear is a noun
meaning an ancestor.

Example: Please forbear talking further about your repugnant

forebear.

formally, formerly

/ˈfôrməlē/, /ˈfôrmərlē/

Both words are adverbs. Formally means rigidly. Formerly means before.

Example: The firm formally resolved to abandon practices that

formerly proved dangerous.

forth, fourth

/fôrTH/, /fôrTH/

Forth is an adverb meaning forward. Fourth is the ordinal number
associated with the cardinal number four (4).

Example: Proceed forth to the fourth block, turn right, then proceed
forth another four blocks.

gibe, gybe, jibe, jive

/jīb/, /jīb/, /jīb/, /jīv/

As nouns, gibe and jibe both mean an insult or a taunt; and as verbs,

gibe and jibe mean to insult or mock. As verbs jibe and gybe mean to

change the course of a ship by shifting the sail to the other side of
the vessel; and as nouns, jibe and gybe mean the act of making such a
change in the sails. Jibe, used as a verb, also means to agree. As a
noun, jive means a lively type of dancing popular in the 1940s and 1950s
or lively, meaningless talking. As a verb, jive means to dance to lively
music.

Example: As the yacht jibed /gybed to starboard, the bandleader gibed

/ jibed (mocked) the performers, who were jiving to a recording by Glenn
Miller. The director’s jests failed to jibe (agree) with the dancers’
mood.

hall, haul

/hôl/, /hôl/

A hall is a noun meaning a corridor between rooms or a large room for
gatherings. Haul generally is a verb meaning to pull or drag. As a noun,

haul means a long distance traveled or a stolen property.

Example: Should I haul the box into the main hall?

hear, here

/hir/, /hir/

Hear is a verb meaning to perceive sound. Here is an adverb meaning at
the present place.

Example: I hear that you were here yesterday.

hoard, horde

/hôrd/, /hôrd/

As a verb, hoard means to collect or to selfishly keep, and as a noun,

hoard means a large store of money or valuable objects. Horde is a noun
meaning a large group of people.

Example: A detachment from the Golden Horde discovered a hoard of

gold coins in the fortress, which had been hoarded by the prior ruler.

holey, holy, wholly

/ˈhōlē/, /ˈhōlē/, /ˈhōl(l)ē/

Holey is an adjective meaning to have holes. Holy is an adjective
meaning sacred. Wholly is an adverb meaning totally or completely.

Example: The priest’s holy vestment was holey, having been wholly

infested with moths over many years.

ingenious, ingenuous

/inˈjēnyəs/, /ˌinˈjenyo͞oəs/

Both words are adjectives. Ingenious means clever or inventive.

Ingenuous means innocent or unsuspecting.

Example: The journeyman carpenter exercised the ingenious ability to use
most of the scrap lumber. The ingenuous apprentice failed to recognize
the significance of his boss’s accomplishment.

instance, instants

/ˈinstəns/, /ˈinstənts/

Both words are nouns. Instance is one event, while instants is the
plural of the word instant, and thus means several moments of time.

Example: During this instance, the conveyors experienced several

instants of light loading.

irrelevant, irreverent

/əˈreləvənt/, /əˈrev(ə)rənt/

Both words are adjectives. Irrelevant means not meaningful.

Irreverent means disrespectful.

Example: The supervisor made several irreverent remarks that were

irrelevant to the issue.

its, it’s

/its/, /its/

Its is the possessive pronoun for the word it. It’s is the contraction
of it is.

Example: It’s time to understand its impact.

know, no

/nō/, /nō/

Know is the verb meaning to understand or be acquainted with. No is the
adverb or adjective meaning not.

Example: Know this, when I say “no,” I mean no.

ladder, later, latter

/ˈladər/, /ˈlātər, ˈlādər/, /ˈlatər, ˈladər/

Ladder is a noun meaning a device for climbing. Later is used both as an
adverb and as an adjective to mean after or following in time. Latter is
an adjective meaning near to the end.

Example: Later in the presentation, we learned how production of

ladders surged in the latter months.

lead, lead, led

/led/, /lēd/, /led/

Lead (/led/) is a noun indicating a heavy, soft, gray metal. Lead
(/lēd/) is the present tense of the verb meaning go ahead while
encouraging others to follow. Led (/led/) is the past tense of the verb
lead (/lēd/) meaning to go ahead while encouraging others to follow.

Example: Monica took the lead to eliminate lead (metal) from the

chemical inventory. This led to us having more storage space.

lessen, lesson

/ˈles(ə)n/, /ˈles(ə)n/

Lessen is a verb meaning to make less. Lesson is the noun meaning a
learning experience.

Example: The mechanic learned the lesson that he had to lessen

tension on the pulley.

loath, loathe

/lōTH, lōT͟H/, /lōT͟H/

Loath is an adjective meaning reluctant or unwilling. Loathe is a verb
meaning to strongly dislike.

Example: Sue is loath to admit that she loathes watermelon.

loose, lose, loss

/lo͞os/, /lo͞oz/, /lôs, läs/

Loose is an adjective meaning to be free from restraint, relaxed, or
limber. Lose is a verb that means to fail to keep. Loss is a noun
indicating damage or waste.

Example: Be aware not to lose the screw. If it is too loose, it might
vibrate loose, thus losing it and creating an even bigger loss.

main, mane

/mān/, /mān/

Main is an adjective that means the most important. Mane is a noun that
means the long hair on the neck of a horse, lion, or other animal.

Example: The boy’s main focus when currying (grooming) the horse

was combing the mane and tail.

moral, morale

/ˈmôrəl/, /məˈral/

As an adjective, moral means ethical or correct. As a noun, moral

means a lesson or ethical standard. Morale is a noun that means the
mental attitude of a person or group.

Example: This experience cemented the well-known moral that moral

behavior improves team morale.

passed, past

/past/, /past/

Passed is the past tense and past participle of the verb to pass, which
means to go by or to transmit something. As an adjective, adverb, or

preposition, past can mean having occurred or existed in a previous
time.

As an adverb or preposition, past also can mean moving from one side to
another or being later in time. As a noun, past means the time period
before the moment of time in question or the history of a person or
thing.

Example: During the past, the forklift passed this point often. And now,
I see it moving slowly past the garage door.

peace, piece

/pēs/, /pēs/

Both words are nouns. Peace is a condition free from dissension or
distraction. Piece is a portion of something.

Example: Eliminating distractions proved a key piece to achieving

peace.

peak, peek, pique, piqué

/pēk/, /pēk/, /pēk/, /pēˈkā/

As a noun, peak means the top of a thing or the highest point. As a
verb, peak means to reach the highest point. It also means to decline in
health or spirits. In addition, as an adjective, peak means the
greatest, best, or most. As a verb, peek means to look quickly; and as a
noun, peek is the action of looking quickly. As a verb, pique means to
stimulate interest or to be irritated by a cause. In addition, as a
noun, pique is a feeling of irritation or resentment. Written with an
acute accent mark and pronounced /pēˈkā/,

piqué is a stiff fabric woven with a strong ribbing or raised pattern.

Example: When John peeked out the window, he saw the tourists returning
who had climbed the neighboring mountain peak. They wore red, piqué polo
shirts. Their adventure piqued John’s admiration, but John’s son was
still in a fit of pique, because he had been required to stay on the
farm during the peak harvest.

peal, peel

/pēl/, /pēl/

As a verb, peal means to ring loudly or make a loud sound in a manner
like a bell. As a noun, peal is the sounding of a loud bell. As a verb,
peel

means to remove the skin of fruit, vegetables, or other similar items.
As a noun, peel is the outer surface of fruit or vegetables.

Example: The young woman peeled an apple while the church bells

pealed.

pedal, peddle, petal

/ˈpedl/, /ˈpedl/, /ˈpetl, ˈpedl/

As a noun, pedal is a foot-operated lever. As a verb, pedal means to
move by pushing pedals, such as riding a bicycle. Peddle is a verb
meaning to sell, especially small goods by going from place to place. A
petal is a colored segment of a flower.

Example: Rather than pedal his bicycle, the boy stood by the wall,

awestruck by the roses with the variegated petals. Meanwhile, the street
vendor continued to peddle his wares.

pendant, pendent

/ˈpendənt/, /ˈpendənt/

Pendant is a noun meaning a piece of hanging jewelry or a hanging lamp,
fan, rope, or chain. Pendent is an adjective meaning hanging down,
pending (about to happen), or undecided.

Example: Jacqueline remained pendent about her choice of a gold

pendant.

personal, personnel

/ˈpərs(ə)n(ə)l/, /ˌpərsəˈnel/

Personal is an adjective meaning pertaining to a particular individual.

Personnel is a noun meaning a group of people hired to work.

Example: She made a personal commitment to challenge the newly

hired personnel.

plain, plane

/plān/, /plān/

As an adjective, plain means simple, clear, or obvious. As a noun,

plain means a flat land without trees. As a noun, plane is a smooth
surface, either flat or sloped. In this sense, plane is used to describe
shapes in geometry and to describe machines that fly, for example,
airplanes. As a verb, plane means to make smooth, to fly without wing
movement, or to skim over the surface of a liquid.

Example: The plan became plain, as the engineer worked on the design of
the plane. He was drafting a plane, which sloped at a 3.2-degree angle.

Later the technician would plane a board to resemble the plane’s wings.

pole, poll

/pōl/, /pōl/

The noun pole is a long, slender object. As a noun, poll is a location
where voting occurs, the process of voting, or the top of a person’s
head where hair grows. As a verb, poll means to record votes or to cut
the horns off an animal, such as a cow.

Example: While the ranchers gathered at the wooden pole, the

researcher took an opinion poll by asking who preferred polled
(dehorned) cattle.

poor, pore, pour

/po͝or, pôr/, /pôr/, /pôr/

As an adjective, poor means lacking wealth or being of a low quality.

As a noun, pore means a small opening on a surface, such as on the skin
of an animal or plant. As a verb, pore means to think intently, such as
to mentally absorb information through careful study or reading. Pour is
a verb meaning to allow a liquid or granular substance to flow.

Example: Sweat poured from his pores, as the poor farmer poured

clover seed into the planting machine. He had pored over the question of
what to do to improve the quality of his poor land.

populace, populous

/ˈpäpyələs/, /ˈpäpyələs/

Populace is a noun meaning the people living in a place. Populous is an
adjective meaning having a large population.

Example: The television ad wants you to believe that the populace of
London enjoys living in a populous city.

precede, proceed

/prəˈsēd/, /prəˈsēd, prōˈsēd/

Both words are verbs. Precede means to come before. Proceed means to go
forth or continue.

Example: If we proceed with this design now, we will precede the

competition.

presence, presents

/ˈprezəns/, /prə'zents/

As a noun, presence means attendance or appearance. As a verb,

presents means to give or introduce. As a noun, the word presents means
gifts.

Example: Even though the handbook presents a warning about gift

giving, the team leader distributed presents in the presence of the
crew.

principal, principle

/ˈprinsəpəl/, /ˈprinsəpəl/

As an adjective, principal means the main or most important. As a noun,
principal means a school official, the owner or leader of a business, or
a quantity of money or wealth. Principle is a noun meaning an important
idea or truth.

Example: The principal designer emphasized the correct engineering

principles he had learned under the hands of the academy principal years
before. This principle ensured the firm’s principals (owners) would be
protected.

prophecy, prophesy

/ˈpräfəsē/, /ˈpräfəˌsī/

Prophecy is a noun meaning a statement about the future. Prophesy is a
verb meaning to predict the future.

Example: The market analysts prophesy that prices will rise. As a

stockholder, I like this prophecy.

prostate, prostrate

/ˈpräsˌtāt/, /ˈprästrāt/

Prostate is a gland in male mammals. As a verb, prostrate means to lie
face down or to reduce someone to extreme physical weakness. As an

adjective, prostrate means lying face down.

Example: His father had prostate cancer. As the cancer spread to other
parts of his body, it prostrated his former strength.

quiet, quit, quite

/ˈkwīət/, /kwit/, /kwīt/

Quiet is an adjective meaning without sound. Quit is a verb meaning to
stop. Quite is an adverb meaning completely or considerable.

Example: I am quite comfortable, as long as the office is quiet. Quit
disturbing me, and I will be quite happy.

rain, reign, rein

/rān/, /rān/, /rān/

As a noun, rain is moisture that falls through the atmosphere. As a
verb, rain means to fall as droplets. As a verb, reign means to rule as
king or queen. As a noun, reign is the time when a king or queen rules.
As a noun, rein is a strap attached to a bit, which is placed in an
animal’s mouth (especially a horse’s mouth) and used to guide the
animal. As a verb, rein

means to use reins to guide or slow the movement of an animal
(especially a horse). Rein also means to restrain anything.

Example: During the reign of King Henry, it rained much. The severe
weather reined in the king’s military campaign.

rational, rationale

/ˈraSH(ə)n(ə)l/, /ˌraSHəˈnal/

Rational is an adjective meaning logical. Rationale is a noun meaning
reasons for action or belief.

Example: The actress prided herself on being a rational person, and
therefore she had strong rationale for her belief.

respectfully, respectively

/rəˈspek(t)fəlē/, /rəˈspektivlē/

Respectfully is an adverb meaning giving respect or honor.

Respectively is an adverb indicating the same order of items.

Example: Respectfully addressing the crowd, the manager summarized

the earning statement, which showed the company achieved April and May
profits of $850,000 and $920,000, respectively.

right, rite, write, -wright

/rīt/, /rīt/, /rīt/, /rīt/

Right is an adjective meaning correct, proper, or fair. It is also a
direction, such as right turn or right hand. As a verb, right means to
straighten, rectify, or correct. As a noun, right means justice or
ownership.

As an adverb, right means straight or direct, as in “He walked right to
his house.” Rite is a noun meaning a ritual or ceremony. Write is a verb
meaning to put words, numbers, or symbols into a record, such as writing
on paper or writing an email on a computer. The suffix “-wright” means a
worker, as in wheelwright.

Example: The shipwright turned the drawing right side up. There he
proceeded to write instructions in the right margin with the ferocity of
a Celtic priest performing an ancient rite.

segue, Segway

/ˈseɡwā/, /ˈseɡwā/

As a verb, segue means to move into another discussion topic, movie
scene, or piece of music. As a noun, segue means an uninterrupted
transition from one discussion topic, piece of music, or film scene to

another. Segway is a trademark for a two-wheel, motorized vehicle
introduced in 2001 where the rider stands directly above the axle and

controls the vehicle from handles mounted on a vertical post.

Example: The appearance of the police officer on a Segway gave Jane an
opportunity to segue the conversation into another topic.

sense, since

/sens/, /sins/

As a verb, sense means to feel or perceive. As a noun, sense is the
faculty to feel or perceive. Since is an adverb meaning before or
therefore.

Example: They sense the design is correct, since all the pieces match.

In this sense, they are correct. I have known this since yesterday.

shone, shown

/SHōn/, /SHōn/

Shone is the past tense form of the verb shine, meaning to give forth
light. Shown is the past tense form of the verb show, meaning to
display.

Example: Blue light shone from the monitor, falling across the dark
room. Thus, I was shown the scene again.

specie, species

/ˈspēSHē,ˈspēsē/, /ˈspēsēz,ˈspēSHēz/

Both words are nouns. Specie is money in the form of coins. Species

is a group of living things capable of reproducing.

Example: Queen Ann used specie to buy feathers of a beautiful species of
parrots.

stanch, staunch

/stôn(t)SH,stän(t)SH/, /stôn(t)SH,stän(t)SH/

Stanch is a verb meaning to stop, especially to stop the flow of blood.

Staunch is an adjective meaning loyal or committed.

Example: The staunch supporter of the revolution tried to stanch the
continuing loss of membership from the political party.

stationary, stationery

/ˈstāSHəˌnerē/, /ˈstāSHəˌnerē/

Stationary is an adjective meaning fixed, not moving. Stationery is a
noun meaning paper and other materials used for writing.

Example: The secretary stood stationary in front of the stationery
store.

steel, steal

/stēl/, /stēl/

As a noun, steel is a strong alloy of iron and carbon. As a verb, steel

means to make your feelings or resolution strong. Steal is a verb
meaning to take unlawfully. Steal also means to move quietly so as not
to be detected.

Example: Robbers like to steal expensive steel wheels from unprotected
cars. The thieves steel their fear of being caught as they steal through
the streets at night looking for targets.

straight, strait

/strāt/, /strāt/

Straight generally is an adjective or adverb meaning staying in the same
direction without bending. As a noun, straight means something that is
free from curves or in a row (such as the straight in a racetrack or a

straight in a card game like poker). As an adjective, strait means
narrow.

As a noun, strait means a narrow passage or situation characterized by
trouble or difficulty.

Example: After passing through the strait, Captain Magellan sailed

straight northwest, because his crews were in a dire strait from a
severe food shortage.

tail, tale

/tāl/, /tāl/

Both words are nouns. Tail is the hindmost part of an animal, object, or
group. A tale is a story or narrative.

Example: The fisherman told another tale as he cut the heads and tails
from the day’s catch.

tare, tear, tear

/ter/, /ter/, /tir/

As a noun, tare is a weed or the vetch plant, which is cultivated for
fodder or silage. A tare also is an allowance made for the weight of a
container or package when weighing an object or substance. As a verb,
tare

means to set a weighing device to accommodate the weight of a container
or package. As a noun, a tear (/ter/), is a breach or a split, which
generally damages an item. As a verb, tear (/ter/) means to pull apart.
As a noun, a

tear (/tir/) is a drop of liquid from in an eye. As a verb, tear (/tir/)
means to produce tears, to cry.

Example: The chemist knew the tare weight of the weighing dish and

used this knowledge to tare the analytical scale. Later, she found a
tear in her lab coat. This brought a tear to her eye.

than, then

/T͟Han, T͟Hən /, /T͟Hen/

Than is a conjunction or preposition used in comparisons. Then is an
adverb that refers to time.

Example: After removing the paper, you then can make more than a few
corrections.

their, there, they’re

/T͟Her/, /T͟Her/, /T͟Her/

Their is a possessive pronoun meaning belonging to persons or things.

There is an adverb used to show an object’s location. They’re is a
contraction of they are.

Example: Their book is located over there, near the entrance. They’re
sure to find it there.

threw, through

/THro͞o/, /THro͞o/

Threw is the past tense of the verb throw. Through is a preposition
meaning in one end and out the other.

Example: The motor threw a rod through the engine wall, thoroughly

destroying the machine.

to, too, two

/to͞o, tə/ /to͞o/, /to͞o/

To is a preposition that shows movement or direction. The adverb too

means also. Two is the cardinal number 2.

Example: Sending the claim to the two companies should not be too

difficult.

venal, venial

/ˈvēnl/, /ˈvēnēəl/

Venal is an adjective meaning motivated by bribery. Venial is an
adjective denoting a small sin or crime.

Example: The venal politician was guilty of more than venial mistakes.

veracity, voracity

/vəˈrasədē/, /vəˈrasədē/

Both words are nouns. Veracity means truthfulness. Voracity means
gluttony.

Example: The king’s voracity completely discredited his veracity.

weak, week

/wēk/, /wēk/

Weak is an adjective meaning the opposite of strong. Week is a noun
meaning the length of time marked by seven days.

Example: This activity reveals the weak link in this week’s schedule.

weather, whether

/ˈweT͟Hər/, /weT͟Hər/

As a noun, weather means the condition of the air and sky. As a verb,

weather means to change or wear away do to exposure to air, rain,
sunlight,

and temperature change. Whether is a conjunction that introduces two or
more alternatives.

Example: Whether we understand the weather or not, we have to enjoy its
variability. A wet climate can weather exposed lumber rapidly.

whose, who’s

/ho͞oz/, /ho͞oz/

Whose is a possessive pronoun meaning associated with a person.

Who’s is a contraction of who is.

Example: Whose responsibility is it? And who’s going to do something
about it?

your, you’re

/yôr, yo͝or/, /yo͝or, yôr/

Your is a possessive pronoun indicating the person or persons being
addressed by the speaker. You’re is a contraction of you are.

Example: You’re correct. That is your best option.

could of, should of, would of

Could of, should of, and would of are incorrect renderings of could’ve,

should’ve, and would’ve, which are contractions of could have, should
have, and would have.

OceanofPDF.com

Photo Credits

Tom Peters, publicity photograph by Allison Shirreffs for Tom Peters
Company, https://tompeters.com/images/reimagine/TomPeters300.jpg,

accessed 13 Mar 2010, and DEAD-URL-tompeters.com/photo_credits.php,

accessed 13 Mar 2010, dead URL.

Abraham Lincoln, photograph by Alexander Gardner, 8 Nov 1863

(two weeks prior to the Gettysburg Address), Library of Congress, Prints
and Photographs Division, digital ID cph.3a53289,

https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Abraham_Lincoln_head_on_shou

lders_photo_portrait.jpg, accessed 22 May 2015.

Sumerian Ur Cuneiform clay tablet, circa 2500 BC, which

summarizes an account of silver, from Shuruppak or Abu Salabikh, Iraq,

now at the British Museum, London, BM 15826, photograph by Gavin

Collins, 27 Feb 2010, Wikimedia,

https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Sumerian_account_of_silver_for_

the_govenor.JPG, accessed 13 Oct 2018.

Star Wars script, 3rd draft, 1 Aug 1975, photograph by Niall Balmer,
DEAD-URL-originalstarwarsprops.com/episodeiv.htm, accessed 22 May

2015, dead URL. Used by written permission.

Ralph Waldo Emerson, photograph by Southworth & Hawes, circa 1857,
George Eastman House Collection, Accession Number:

1981:2711:0001,

https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ralph_Waldo_Emerson_ca1857.j

pg, accessed 22 May 2015.

James Thurber, publicity photograph published 1935, by Harper &
Brothers, Library of Congress, Prints and Photographs division,

reproduction number LC USZ62-127411, call number NYWTS - BIOG--

Thurber, James, online catalog

https://www.loc.gov/pictures/item/2001695413/, widely published on the

internet, accessed 22 May 2015.

Ernest Hemingway, editing at desk at Sun Valley Lodge, Idaho,

Dec 1939, publicity photograph by Lloyd Arnold for Charles Scribner’s

Sons, City of Toronto Archives, fonds 1244, William James family fonds,
item 2111, DEAD-URL-

toronto.ca/City%20Of%20Toronto/City%20Clerks/Toronto%20Archives/I
mages/f1244_it2111.jpg, accessed 27 May 2015, dead URL. As of 2015,

the Toronto Archives catalog mistakenly attributed the date to circa
1930, but the date is from 1939; the photograph closely resembles a
similar

publicity photograph taken by Lloyd Arnold for the dust jacket of the
first edition of For Whom the Bell Tolls,

https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:ErnestHemingway.jpg, accessed 27
May 2015.

OceanofPDF.com

Author

Charles Maxwell is an engineer, financial analyst, and manager in the

mining industry. In addition to advancing projects and evaluating

acquisitions, he ghostwrites memoirs and teaches business writing and

financial analysis.

If you have a compelling story to tell or you need to elevate the
writing skills at your organization, contact him at:

www.ToweringSkills.com/contact/.

OceanofPDF.com

One Last Thing

If this book helped you, please post a review on Amazon.

OceanofPDF.com

Notes

[1] Tom Peters, “Brand You Thoughts from Tom Peters: Work on Your
Writing,” YouTube video, Tom Peters channel, uploaded 21 Jan 2010,

https://youtu.be/EEHLHdoPfWA, accessed 3 Oct 2018.

[2] Wikipedia, “Gettysburg Address,”

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gettysburg_Address, accessed 3 Oct 2018.

[3] Marvin H. Swift, “Clear Writing Means Clear Thinking Means…,”

Harvard Business Review, Jan 1973; modified version online at

https://hbr.org/1973/01/clear-writing-means-clear-thinking-means,
accessed

3 Oct 2018.

[4] Radicati Group (technology market research firm), “Email Statistics

Report, 2015-2019,” no date, https://www.radicati.com/wp/wp-

content/uploads/2015/02/Email-Statistics-Report-2015-2019-Executive-

Summary.pdf, accessed 17 Jul 2020; “Email Market, 2018-2022,” Radicati

Group, Mar 2018, summarized by Heinz Tschabitscher, in “The Number of

Emails Sent Per Day in 2018,” Lifewire (company that provides content

regarding electronic technology), https://www.lifewire.com/how-many-

emails-are-sent-every-day-1171210, accessed 9 Sep 2018, article at URL

subsequently was changed. In addition, Andrea Robbins, “The Shocking

Truth about How Many Emails Are Sent,” Campaign Monitor (email

marketing company), 19 Mar 2018, DEAD-URL-

campaignmonitor.com/blog/email-marketing/2018/03/shocking-truth-about-

how-many-emails-sent/, accessed 3 Oct 2018, dead URL.

[5] Although often attributed to Mark Twain, no one knows who first made
this statement; Wikiquote, “Mark Twin,”

https://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/Mark_Twain, accessed 3 Oct 2018.

[6] OCLC, “Inside World Cat,” https://www.oclc.org/en/worldcat/inside-

worldcat.html, accessed 10 Jul 2020.

[7] Although widely quoted on the internet and attributed to Ralph Waldo
Emerson, the passage is not traceable to any actual source and not
present on any of the online sites that quote Emerson.

[8] Roger Angell, Forward to The Elements of Style, by William Struck
Jr.

and E. B. White (Longman imprint, Pearson Education Company, 4th

edition, 2000), p. ix.

[9] William Stafford, as quoted by Steven Ratiner, in Giving Their Word:
Conversations With Contemporary Poets (University of Massachusetts

Press, 2002), p. 19, online at https://books.google.com/books?

id=RLxZAAAAMAAJ&q=%22Lower+your+standards+and+keep+writing

%22&dq=%22Lower+your+standards+and+keep+writing%22&ei=5ZUzS8

XeEKHiyQSr9a2tAQ&cd=1, accessed 3 Oct 2018.

[10] James Thurber, “The Sheep in Wolf's Clothing,” The New Yorker, 29
Apr 1939, and Fables for Our Time & Famous Poems Illustrated, 1940, as
quoted by Wikiquote, in “James Thurber,”

https://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/James_Thurber, accessed 15 Jul 2015.

[11] Ray Bradbury, “A Conversation with Ray Bradbury,” a short film by
Lawrence Bridges, produced by the National Endowment for the Arts for

the Big Read program, YouTube video, TheRedCarChannel channel,

uploaded 11 Sep 2008, https://youtu.be/EzD0YtbViCs, accessed 3 Oct 2018;
3½ minutes into the video Bradbury describes his writing at the

University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) library. The Larry Bridges
channel uploaded to YouTube on 8 Jul 2009 a longer version of the

interview, https://youtu.be/PF3uZf4G3Lo, accessed 3 Oct 2018.

[12] For instance, see Laurence O'Donnell, “Music and the Brain,”

http://www.cerebromente.org.br/n15/mente/musica.html, accessed 3 Oct
2018, and Arthur Harvey, “An Intelligence View of Music Education,”

DEAD-URL-

webshare.northseattle.edu/fam180/topics/music/musicand%20mind.htm,

accessed 3 Oct 2018, dead URL.

[13] Ernest Hemingway, Moveable Feast: The Restored Edition (Scribner,
2014), p. 26.

[14] Father Tom Allender, S. J., quoted by Scott Wood in “Sharpening
Your Legal Writing Skills,” which appeared in “Survival Guide for New

Attorneys in California,” Los Angeles Lawyer, (Los Angeles County Bar
Association magazine), Fall 2006, p. 9-10,

https://www.lacba.org/docs/default-source/lal-back-issues/2006-

issues/survival-guide-fall-2006.pdf, accessed 3 Oct 2018.

[15] Richard Lederer, The Miracle of Language (Simon and Schuster, 1991,

revised 1999), p. 30-31; also online at
http://verbivore.com/wordpress/the-

case-for-the-strength-and-grace-of-short-words/, accessed 3 Oct 2018.

[16] John Dewey, The Quest for Certainty (George Allen & Unwin Ltd.,
London, 1929), p. 120, online at

https://archive.org/details/questforcertaint029410mbp/page/n125,
accessed

3 Oct 2018.

[17] This example uses common environmental abbreviations: FA = federal
action, EIS = environmental impact statement, EA = environmental

assessment, NSI = no significant impact, LA = lead agency,

FONSI = finding of no significant impact, PA = proposed action, and

CATEX = categorical exclusion.

[18] Avi Selk, “One space between each sentence, they said. Science just
proved them wrong.” The Washington Post, 4 May 2018,

https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/speaking-of-

science/wp/2018/05/04/one-space-between-each-sentence-they-said-

science-just-proved-them-wrong-2/, accessed 22 Nov 2018; and Rebecca L.

Johnson, Becky Bui, and Lindsay L. Schmitt, “Are two spaces better than
one? The effect of spacing following periods and commas during reading,”

Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics, Vol. 80, p. 1504-1511, published
24 Apr 2018, issued Aug 2018,

https://link.springer.com/article/10.3758/s13414-018-1527-6, accessed 17

Jul 2020.

[19] Steve Rayson, “We Analyzed 100 Million Headlines. Here’s What We
Learned (New Research),” BuzzSumo (social media metrics company),

26 Jun 2017, https://buzzsumo.com/blog/most-shared-headlines-study/,

accessed 20 May 2019, title subsequently changed; and Simon Edelstyn,

employee of Outbrain (content distribution and monitoring company), “5

Tips to Help Improve Your Headline Click-Through Rate,” The Guardian, 28
Mar 2013, content provided by Outbrain,
DEAD-URL-theguardian.com/media-network-outbrain-partner-zone/5-tips-headline-

click-through-rate, accessed circa 2013, dead URL, copy at

https://web.archive.org/web/20131205105615/http://www.theguardian.com/

media-network-outbrain-partner-zone/5-tips-headline-click-through-rate,

accessed 20 May 2019. Also see Kevan Lee, “Infographic: The Optimal

Length for Every Social Media Update and More,” Buffer (social media

management company), 21 Oct 2014, revised 30 Nov 2018,

https://buffer.com/library/optimal-length-social-media, accessed 20 May
2019.

[20] Jeffrey Kuiken, Anne Schuth, Martijn Spitters, and Maarten Marx,

“Effective Headlines of Newspaper Articles in a Digital Environment,”

Digital Journalism (journal published by Taylor & Francis academic
press), on 2 Feb 2017, vol. 5, issue 10, p. 1300-1314,

https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/21670811.2017.1279978,

accessed 20 May 2019.

[21] D. Bnonn Tennant, “Can You Write a Better Headline Than This? Not
Using Old Headline Formulas You Can’t,” KissMetrics (social media

company), circa 19 Dec 2011, DEAD-URL-blog.kissmetrics.com/how-to-

write-headlines/, accessed 2013, dead URL, copy at

https://web.archive.org/web/20120107151230/https://blog.kissmetrics.com/

how-to-write-headlines/, accessed 20 May 2019; and Jakob Nielson, “First

2 Words: A Signal for the Scanning Eye,” Nielsen Norman Group

(computer interface consulting firm), 6 Apr 2009,

https://www.nngroup.com/articles/first-2-words-a-signal-for-scanning/,

accessed 20 May 2019.

OceanofPDF.com

Document Outline

- What You Will Learn
- Good Writing Is Important
  - Documents Are the Bridges We Build to Convey Our Thoughts
  - Clear Writing Improves Thinking
  - Good Writing Has Always Been Important
  - The Modern World Depends on Writing
  - Writing Better Can Boost Your Career
  - Conclusion
  - Additional Resources
- 7-Step Writing Process
  - Your Personal Plan
  - Additional Resources
- Step 1 – Identify Readers & Purpose
  - Seek Guidance
  - Put Yourself in the Place of Your Readers
  - Define Your Purpose
  - Write or Not Write
  - Make Notes
  - Create an Attribute Matrix
  - Match Your Document’s Form to Its Purpose
  - Control the Tone
  - Summary
  - Your Personal Plan
  - Additional Resources
- Step 2 – Collect Information
  - Consider Your Purpose
  - Set a Goal
  - Report Progress
  - Sources
  - Note Taking
  - Tools for Capturing Information
  - Calculations, Drawings, and Sketches
  - Summary
  - Your Personal Plan
  - Additional Resources
- Step 3 – Brainstorm
  - Brainstorming Strategies
  - Capture Techniques
  - Assess Completeness
  - Summary
  - Your Personal Plan
  - Additional Resources
- Step 4 – Organize
  - Organization Steps
  - Formal Outlines
  - Templates
  - Patterns
  - Capture Attention
  - Storytelling
  - Summaries and Conclusions
  - Persist
  - Summary
  - Your Personal Plan
  - Additional Resources
- Step 5 – Draft
  - Withhold Judgment
  - Find a Place Where You Can Focus
  - Music
  - Select the Best Time of the Day
  - Have Your Equipment Ready
  - Use Voice Recognition Software
  - Go for Speed
  - Write Short Sentences
  - Talk to Your Readers
  - Control the Tone
  - Keep a Little in Reserve
  - Working with Data and Images
  - Draft the Summary and Conclusions Last
  - Summary
  - Your Personal Plan
  - Additional Resources
- Step 6 – Revise
  - Take a Structured Approach to Editing
  - Editing Equipment
  - Remember the Reader
  - Develop Your Ideas
  - Grammar
  - Keep It Simple – Less Can Be More
  - Provide Facts
  - Be Alert to Commonly Misused Words
  - Use Concrete Nouns and Strong Verbs
  - Avoid Confusing Pronouns
  - Choose the Right Words
  - Subordinate Less Important Details
  - Emphasize What Is Important
  - Use Active Voice
  - Make Positive Assertions
  - Place the Most Important or Complex at the End
  - Proceed from Known to Unknown
  - Keep Related Words Together
  - Use Parallel Construction to Discuss Similar Ideas
  - Use Different Constructions for Variety and Development
  - Check the Sound
  - Use Transitions
  - Fix Capitalization and Punctuation
  - Attend to Page Layout and Design
  - Practice
  - Summary
  - Your Personal Plan
  - Additional Resources
- Step 7 – Proof
  - Determine the Right Amount of Proofing
  - Give Yourself Time
  - Take a Sequenced Approach
  - Read Aloud
  - Print or Reformat the Document
  - Get Help
  - Track Changes
  - Use Spelling, Grammar, and Style Checking Software
  - Obtain More Spelling Help
  - Watch Out for Words People Confuse
  - Capitalization
  - Punctuation
  - Visual Appearance
  - Summary
  - Your Personal Plan
  - Additional Resources
- Application – Preparing Informative Documents
  - Email
  - Letters and Memos
  - Reports
  - Presentations
  - Articles, Blogs, and Websites
  - Business Proposals
  - Summary
  - Your Personal Plan
  - Additional Resources
- Afterword
  - Your Personal Plan
  - Additional Resources
- Appendix – Words People Confuse
- Photo Credits
- Author
- One Last Thing
- Notes
