[]

[]

[]

[]

Business Report Guides

[]

Business Report Guides

Research Reports and Business

Plans

Dorinda Clippinger

Business Report Guides: Research Reports and Business Plans Copyright ©
Business Expert Press, LLC, 2019.

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any
means—electronic, mechanical, photocopy, recording, or any other except
for brief quotations, not to exceed 400 words, without the prior
permission of the publisher.

First published in 2019 by

Business Expert Press, LLC

222 East 46th Street, New York, NY 10017

www.businessexpertpress.com

ISBN-13: 978-1-94944-372-1 (paperback)

ISBN-13: 978-1-94944-373-8 (e-book)

Business Expert Press Corporate Communication Collection

Collection ISSN: 2156-8162 (print)

Collection ISSN: 2156-8170 (electronic)

Cover and interior design by Exeter Premedia Services Private Ltd.,
Chennai, India First edition: 2019

10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

Printed in the United States of America.

Abstract

Business Report Guides: Research Reports and Business Plans offers
strategies for creating two complex reports. Also, it includes a
complete replica of a business research report and a business plan. The
guides for both reports emphasize thorough planning and preparation and
take readers through these essential steps. Additional guides aid
readers in writing, producing, and presenting research reports and
business plans. This book is for you if you are an MBA candidate or an
upper-level student in any professional field OR if you are a business
manager or other professional whose career involves (1) conducting
business research and generating reports for others in and outside your
organization or (2) attracting investors for starting an organization or
changing an existing one.

This convenient book includes guides for planning and launching a
research project and writing a research proposal; identifying major
findings in research data, drawing conclusions from findings, and using
them to recommend appropriate action; and managing special features of
formal research reports, including citing sources, page numbering,
preliminary and supplementary pages, and visual displays.

This useful book also discusses why entrepreneurs need a business plan,
objectives of a business plan, and what a business plan contains.

Additionally, the book includes an entire award-winning business plan
that resulted in a successful organization. This valuable illustration
includes insightful annotations and guidelines for creating every part
of the business plan.

The crisp writing style, bullet points, and many realistic examples and
visuals give you essential information quickly. Chapter summaries
include checklists. Business Report Guides: Research Reports and
Business Plans gives you how-to information you can use now—and refer to
frequently throughout your career.

Keywords

conclusions; entrepreneurs; executive summary; findings; future
development; investors; management plan; marketing plan; online formats;
operational plan; primary data collection; pro forma financial
statements; recommendations; report deck format; report preliminaries;
risks and contingencies; source citations; venture strategy; visuals

Contents

Preface

Acknowledgments

Chapter 1 Writing Business Research Reports

Chapter 2 Writing Business Plans

Appendix A: Business Data Sources on the Web and in Libraries

Notes

References

About the Author

Index

Preface

Business Report Guides: Research Reports and Business Plans is designed
to help business managers, MBA candidates, and upper-level college
students develop the distinctive skills that research reports and
business plans require.

The book offers solid guidelines for planning and creating these complex
reports in keeping with “best practices.” Many examples and full- report
visuals help ensure readers’ complete understanding.

In two chapters, readers receive practical solutions to reporting
situations that professionals are likely to encounter at some point:

Chapter 1 covers the preparation and formatting of research reports.

It contains a complete research report, including an appendix

showing the data collection instruments used.

Chapter 2 explains moving a business concept from your, the
entrepreneur’s, mind into a report—a business plan—that wins the support
of (1) prospective co-managers and employees and (2)

potential investors.

Business Report Guides: Research Reports and Business Plans can be your
go-to handbook for years to come. Reading through it in a couple hours,
you can pick up plenty of information that you can apply immediately.
Then keep this book handy and refer to it as needs arise in your future.

Acknowledgments

Thank you, Dr. Debbie DuFrene. Your expert editing transformed my drafts
into this reader-friendly book. Also, thank you, Dr. Shirley Kuiper.
Your earlier writings and vision underpin this publication. Thank you,
too, William Jewell (my husband). Your wit, patience, and love kept me
going.

Thank you, students and associates who have worked with me during my
half century of teaching, researching, publishing, and business
managing.

You have influenced my thinking about educating for business, business
communication, and other business practices.

Please send your suggestions for improving future editions.

CHAPTER 1

Writing Business

Research Reports

Managers must often make decisions such as the following that will have
a major impact on the success of their organizations.

Should a would-be entrepreneur begin the business she has long

contemplated?

Should an advertising agency give a substantial amount of money to a
state university to establish a business communication center?

Should an insurance company change its policy about medical

insurance coverage for domestic partners?

How can an Appalachian mountain resort strive to attract more of the
state’s tourism business?

These and other questions require extensive research before they can be
answered with confidence.

Planning Research

The first step in the research process is to create a plan that clearly
identifies the problem to be studied and its scope as well as the
purpose of the study and the audience to whom the information will be
reported. This plan becomes a guide for collecting data, analyzing data,
and reporting the results of the analysis. A research plan includes 12
parts as indicated in

Figure 1.1.

[]

[]

Figure 1.1 A 12-part research plan

*Two-way arrows suggest that a reiterative approach to these parts of
the research plan may improve its overall quality.

The following list describes each planning step.

Authorization. Are you approved to spend time and money on the research?
Obtain or review your authorization.

Audience. Who will receive your research results—both the primary and
secondary audiences? Identify your audience.

Research problem. Go beyond the managerial problem and its symptoms to
the bigger picture. Define the research problem.

Putting it in question form usually helps clarify.

Purpose. What do you hope to accomplish by doing the study?

Clarify the purpose of the research. If you can, separate the purpose
from the problem.

Scope. You may not be able to study all parts of the research problem;
so ask, which parts will lead me to useful facts? Narrow the scope of
the problem.

Delimitations and limitations. What boundaries are you drawing between
what you will and will not study? This question refers to delimitations.
Could any practical limits on your research lower its applicability to
the problem? This question refers to shortcomings or inadequacies due to
circumstances beyond your control. State and explain your delimitations
and potential limitations of the research.

Data col ection. What kinds of information will you need to answer the
research question? Should you use primary data (collected from records
or people or both), secondary data (collected and published by others),
or both? Plan for data collection.

Data analysis. Does the context call for qualitative or quantitative
data? If the latter, then determine what statistical test to apply to
the data you will collect. Plan for data analysis.

Time schedule. Plan backward from the due date, setting interim dates
for completing each phase of the research. Estimate the time

schedule.

Resources. Include realistic estimates of equipment, labor, supplies,
travel, and other costs. Estimate all resources needed.

Results presentation. What will be the nature of your research report?

What communication medium will you use to make your findings,

conclusions, and recommendations known? Plan the presentation of
results.

Approval. Present your research plan in person, in writing, or both and
seek feedback. In most instances, you will want a contractual agreement
before continuing with the project. Ask for approval to proceed.

Of the 12 steps, defining the problem, narrowing the scope, and planning
data collection are perhaps the most vital. Therefore, these planning
steps require further examination.

Define the Problem

The problem is the central focus of the research. A clear, concise
statement of the problem keeps the researcher on target. To conduct
business research, you must distinguish between the managerial problem
(or symptoms of a problem) and the research problem itself. 1

The observable phenomena about which a decision must be made make up the
managerial problem. Such phenomena are also called the symptoms of the
problem. For example, a manager may observe that the office support
personnel often are tardy for work; turn in poor-quality work; and
complain

about eyestrain, wrist strain, and backache. These are all symptoms that
something is amiss in the office support system. A manager who considers
only one symptom at a time may decide that the resolution to the
“problem”

is to reprimand tardy employees, give negative work evaluations to
employees who do inferior work, or buy new office chairs and wrist
rests.

But a manager who looks at the cluster symptoms may decide that a deeper
problem exists. Perhaps the question that must be addressed is this: How
can we improve the productivity of our office support staff? That
question would become the research problem or research question.

Narrow the Scope

By narrowing the scope of the analysis, you identify the specific
factors or elements to be analyzed. 3 A perfect study would investigate
all possible aspects of the research question. However, time and money
constraints require that you focus your study on the factors most likely
to yield relevant data. Preliminary research often leads to the
identification of those elements. After identifying the factors, you
will concentrate the remainder of your research on those items.

As an example, the new administrator at Peaceful Village, a retirement
center in operation for three years, authorizes research for this
research problem: to explore ways to attract and retain residents. The
study’s-purpose is to enable the retirement center to reach its goal of
99%‐

occupancy. The scope of a study could include these factors regarding
attracting and retaining residents:

A. Advertising

1. Cost/benefit analysis of current program

2. Analysis of competitors’ advertising

B. Intake procedures

1. Work-flow analysis of current procedures

2. Analysis of procedures used in other facilities

3. Residents’ evaluation of current procedures

C. Services to residents

1. Food

2. Recreation

3. Entertainment

4. Personal and medical services

5. Maintenance of private rooms

6. Maintenance of common areas

Notice that the scope remains focused on the problem of attracting and
retaining residents. It does not, for example, include looking at
alternative uses for the building and grounds. That factor is outside
the scope of this research problem.

Plan Data Collection

The first step in data collection is to identify potential sources. 3
Researchers use two kinds of data: primary and secondary. Information
that has been collected and published by others is secondary data.
Books, magazines, journals, and corporate annual reports found in public
or private libraries are examples of secondary data sources. Many
traditional secondary sources are now available through Internet
services and online databases.

Primary data consist of information collected at its origin. People
(customers, employees, and suppliers) and company files are major
sources of primary data used in business research. (Please note that
“data” is the plural form of “datum.” Always refer to data with a plural
pronoun and accompany the word with a plural verb.)

The scope of the research problem directs the selection of data sources.
To ensure the validity of the data, sources must be chosen for their
relevance, not their convenience. Two questions should guide you as you
determine possible sources for research data:

1. What kinds of information do I need to answer the research question?

2. Should I use primary or secondary data sources—or both—to obtain that
information?

Data Need

The research question, divided into appropriate elements or factors of
analysis, must direct your search for data. After you have defined the
research question clearly and have narrowed the scope, you must focus
your attention on finding data directly related to those factors.

Keeping the scope of analysis in mind will assist your efforts to be
both efficient and effective as a researcher. You will be efficient
because you will target your data search toward the sources most likely
to yield meaningful information rather than wasting time looking at
unrelated data. You will be effective because you will be able to judge
all data in terms of their relevance to the research problem and will
not be tempted to include interesting but irrelevant data.

The research question guides the selection of information sources. For
each element in the scope, specific kinds of data and specific data
sources must be identified. More than one kind of data and more than one
data source may be required to analyze an element adequately, as
indicated

in Figure 1.2.

[]

Figure 1.2 Planning data needs and sources

Primary Versus Secondary Data

After narrowing the scope of the analysis, you must determine whether
primary or secondary sources will best answer each element of the
problem, as demonstrated in Figure 1.2. When the problem you are
investigating is unique to your organization, primary data may yield the
only usable information. But if adequate secondary data are available,
you should use them instead of relying solely on the time-consuming
process of collecting from primary sources.

As already noted, primary data are acquired at their sources through
observation, experimentation, interviews, questionnaire surveys, and
searches through company records, while secondary data consist of
information compiled by others and provided in books, blogs, magazines,
journals, and other published sources.

In addition, many business data sources can be accessed on the web.

However, even the most adept web user looking for secondary business
sources can expect to use library print sources, microforms, and
database subscriptions, too. See Appendix A for a list of valuable
sources.

Some researchers mistakenly consider primary data to be better than
secondary data. They assume that information “straight from the source”
is better information than secondhand data. Others prefer to use primary
data because they are stimulated by that data collection process and
feel restricted when they must sit in a library searching through
documents or in front of a computer screen using search engines to find
secondary information. In contrast, some researchers—equally
mistakenly—suspect the accuracy of primary data. They recognize that
people can deliberately distort self-reported information, and
researchers can make incorrect observations or lead people to report
what the researcher wants to record. In addition, some researchers may
feel uncomfortable with the primary data collection process but enjoy
the sense of discovery that comes from searching out well-documented
information in secondary sources.

Neither attitude can produce consistently effective research reports.
When you recognize a problem and the need for research, first consult
secondary sources. Secondary sources often provide information to help
define the problem more clearly and to identify elements that should be
investigated.

To obtain approval, most researchers write their research plan and
present it in a formal document called a research or project proposal. 4
For the

research report in this chapter, the researcher’s proposal is shown in
Figure

1.3a–c (pp. 9−11).

[]

Figure 1.3a Research proposal (authorization, problem, and purpose)

[]

Figure 1.3b Research proposal (scope, description of data,
delimitations,

and limitations)

[]

Figure 1.3c Research proposal (data analysis, schedule, resources,

presentation, and approval)

The proposal may also be presented orally so that managers can ask
questions immediately, clarify any ambiguities, or request changes
before giving their approval.

Research planning includes thinking in advance about the nature and
appearance of the formal report you will write, present orally, or both.

Anticipate whether your report will be printed on paper, prepared as a
slide deck, or posted as a PDF or web pages. For any of these formats,
envision an attractive, functional report that enables readers to absorb
easily the information it contains and stimulates them to act on the
report’s contents.

Formatting a Manuscript

When a report exceeds three pages, instead of the memo or letter format,
use manuscript format. Include a title page and a cover memo or cover
letter. Add other parts—such as a table of contents, list of visuals,
glossary, and so on—if you believe the report’s readers will need them.
Observe these formatting conventions. 5

Use single-spaced or multiple-spaced, blocked paragraphs unless
otherwise indicated. Put blank space above and below headings and
between paragraphs.

For paragraphs in a printed report, use only one size 10 to 12 serif
font, such as Times New Roman OR use a serif font for paragraphs and a
sans serif font for the title and Level 1 and 2 headings. Note: For
reports likely to be read from a screen, reverse the serif and sans
serif font usage.

Use a 1 in. top margin on each page after the first and a 1 in. bottom
margin on all pages—the usual default setting of word processing

software. On page 1, place the report title in large letters, roughly
1.5 in. from the top and leave several blank lines below it.

Use a left margin of 1.5 in. when binding on the left. Otherwise, make
it 1 in.—same as the right margin.

These formatting basics are illustrated in Figures 1.7 and 1.8; and as
you read the next section, you will be referred to these figures, so you
can observe page format along with other report features.

Parts of a Formal Research Report

Business research reports are often classified as informational or
analytical reports. An informational report provides comprehensive data
related to a business problem along with interpretation of the data, but
it offers no conclusions or recommendations. An analytical report
includes conclusions and may also present recommendations.

A characteristic of a formal business report is the inclusion of several
parts that are not included in less formal reports. Although you may
adapt the parts of a formal report to suit the requirements of your
reporting situation, the most comprehensive structure includes the
report parts listed

in Figure 1.4.

[]

Figure 1.4 Parts of a formal research report

Each part is explained in these pages and demonstrated in Figures 1.7,

1.8, and 1.9, pp. 34–58. * The preferred procedure is to display
illustrations as soon as possible after they are introduced in the text.
However, illustrations of the formal research report are grouped so that
all report

pages may be viewed continuously. Consider the report shown in these
figures to be the result of the research proposal presented in Figure
1.3.

Suggestion: Review that proposal now.

Then, as you study the explanation of each report part, examine its
counterpart in the figures. In addition, notice the writing style and
the report’s inductive structure.

Report Preliminaries

The preliminary parts of a formal report help to make the report user
friendly. Those parts provide a convenient way to physically transmit
the report, establish a context for understanding it, and enable the
reader to locate specific information easily. Some preliminary parts may
be omitted when justified by the length of the report, the complexity of
the topic, or the formality of the situation.

Although the report preliminaries, or prelims, are the first pages the
report user sees, many of those parts can be compiled only after you
have written the full report. The prelims must accurately reflect the
report’s content and structure. If you revise your report in any way
after you have written the preliminaries, be sure to check the accuracy
of all preliminary parts and, if necessary, revise them before
delivering the report. For example, be sure that your table of contents
accurately shows the final content and page numbering of your report.
Preliminary parts appear in Figure 1.7 and you will be referred to each
part as you read about it.

Cover or Binder

A reader must be able to handle the report document conveniently.

Although some readers may prefer that you present unbound pages, perhaps
enclosed in an envelope or a folder, many prefer that you bind the
report securely. A cover or binder protects the pages of a printed
report and prevents them from loosening while the reader uses the
report. Your report cover should show at least the title of the report;
if the title is long, a

shortened form may appear on the cover. You may also include a design or
illustration to suggest the content of the report and stimulate
interest. See

Figure 1.7a, p. 34. Naturally, this prelim is omitted if the report is
circulated electronically.

[]

Figure 1.7a Preliminaries: Report cover

[]

[]

Figure 1.7b Preliminaries: Title page

[]

Figure 1.7c Preliminaries: Transmittal letter

Figure 1.7d Preliminaries: Table of contents

[]

Figure 1.7e Preliminaries: List of illustrations

[]

Figure 1.7f Preliminaries: Executive summary

Flyleaves

A blank sheet, called a flyleaf, may be placed at both the front and
back of the report to protect other pages and provide a space for
readers’ comments.

Since flyleaves connote a high level of formality, include them in
printed reports only when you think the situation justifies such
formality. Note, for example, that most hardcover books contain
flyleaves, but many soft cover books do not.

Title Page

As noted earlier, the title page usually contains four facts.

Full title of the report (displayed at the top in large characters)
Identity of the person or agency for whom the report was prepared,
including contact information

Report writer’s identity, including contact information

Transmittal date (month and year)

Although inclusion of the author’s identity is optional, it may be
advantageous to include such information on all reports unless you are
instructed not to do so. Such information will help readers provide
feedback, such as questions, commendations, or requests for new
projects.

The title of the report should provide a concise statement of the
report’s content. Include as much who, what, why, when, and where
information as is possible without creating a cumbersome title. To
achieve conciseness, avoid using unnecessary words and phrases such as
an analysis of or the determination of. A talking title may stimulate
interest more readily than a purely descriptive title. The following
examples contrast a cumbersome, verbose title with a descriptive title
and a talking title.

Cumbersome, verbose:

A Comprehensive Analysis of Tourism in West Virginia and Actions the
Hatfield-McCoy Mountains Coalition Should Take to Increase Tourism in
That Region

Descriptive:

Increasing Tourism in the Hatfield-McCoy Mountains Region of West
Virginia

Talking:

What Should the Hatfield-McCoy Mountains Coalition Do to Increase
Tourism in Its Region?

For the title page, you may use a traditional format or any creative
format that effectively conveys the required information. A traditional
title page format is demonstrated in Figure 1.7b, p. 35. Notice that no
page number appears on the title page, though it is counted in the
numbering scheme.

Transmittal Message

The transmittal message—in letter (external reports) or memo (internal
reports) format—presents the report to your primary reader(s).

If you have written the report in a formal (impersonal) writing style,
the transmittal message gives you an opportunity to speak more
personally to your primary contact person and to reinforce goodwill. The
message may include any comments that will stimulate interest in the
report; confirm confidence in you as the researcher and writer; and
perhaps lead to further interesting, responsible assignments.
Appropriate content for the transmittal message includes some, but not
necessarily all, of the following.

Review of the research problem, purpose, and methodology Highlights of
major findings

Significant recommendations

Comments about the research experience

Offer to discuss the report

Offer to assist with future project

The transmittal message is often bound within the report, either
immediately before or immediately after the title page, as shown in

Figure 1.7c, p. 36.

Authorization and Acceptance Messages

The authorization message provides evidence of permission to undertake
the project, and the acceptance message gives evidence of agreement to
do the task. Those messages are often exchanged before the research
project is undertaken, sometimes orally and sometimes in writing. If
written, they may be included in the report as formal notice to
secondary readers that the project was appropriately authorized and
accepted. However, if the transmittal message includes reference to the
authorization, as in

Figure 1.7c, these messages may be omitted from the report. Note: If
separate authorization and acceptance messages had been included in

Figure 1.7, they would resemble the following examples.

Authorization Message (in appropriate letter or memo format): Please
proceed with the investigation of ways to increase tourism in the
Hatfield-McCoy Mountains region.

As we discussed this morning, the members of the Hatfield-McCoy
Mountains Coalition must be fully aware of current tourism trends and
tourists’ perceptions of the Hatfield-McCoy Mountains region. The

research proposal you presented to the Coalition convinced us that your
agency is the right one to undertake this study. You have my full
support.

You agreed to submit a written report of your findings, conclusions, and
recommendations no later than July 25. I would appreciate a progress
report on July 10.

Acceptance Message (appropriate letter or memorandum format): Thank you
for authorizing Penworthy Research Associates to analyze tourism trends
in West Virginia and tourists’ perceptions of the Hatfield-McCoy
Mountains region. My research team has already begun to collect data.

You will have a report of the research no later than July 25. As you
requested, I will submit a progress report on July 10.

You may occasionally submit unsolicited research reports. In such an
instance, authorization and acceptance messages do not exist; therefore,
the transmittal message must indicate clearly why you are submitting the
report.

Contents

Any report you create will likely have multiple readers now and in the
future. Few of them, however, will read the entire report in sequence.

Instead, they will read selectively, with some readers focusing on the
executive summary; others on the summary, conclusions, and
recommendations; and still others on the visuals included in the
findings. In a lengthy report, a table of contents and list of tables
and figures help readers get an overview of the report and easily refer
to specific parts of it.

The table of contents must list all items that appear after that page:
any preliminary pages that follow and all chapter or section headings
and subheadings used in the report. Do not list preliminary pages that
appear before the table of contents. The number of the page on which
each first-level division begins must be included. Many writers include
page numbers to mark the beginning of each second-level subdivision as
well, as shown in

Figure 1.7d, p. 37. Note: Some writers use an outline numbering system,
such as the decimal system demonstrated in Figure 1.4, to identify
entries in the table of contents.

A list of tables or figures follows the table of contents when the
report includes visuals. When only one or two visuals are used, some
writers include them in the table of contents. However, the reader can
locate the visuals more easily if they appear in a separate list. If the
list is short and space permits, the list may be included on the same
page as the table of contents. If few visuals are used, tables and
figures may be grouped in a single list of illustrations. Otherwise, the
list of tables usually precedes the list of figures, as shown in Figure
1.7e, p. 38.

Preface

A preface is most appropriate in an unsolicited report. It should
present some special details about the report and create interest.
Comments about what stimulated the study and its significance are
appropriate content for a preface. If that information already is
conveyed in the authorization, acceptance, or transmittal messages, you
may omit the preface. A preface is not as comprehensive as an executive
summary, which appears later.

The report preliminaries shown in Figure 1.7 contains no preface. The
following example demonstrates an appropriate preface for that report.

Preface:

The decline of coal mining in the Hatfield-McCoy Mountains region
requires that community leaders pursue all possible means of promoting
new industry in the region. One effective way to improve the economic
well-being of the region is to capture a larger share of the state’s
tourism trade.

This report addresses the challenge of increasing tourism in the
Hatfield-McCoy Mountains region and suggests possible routes to that
increase.

Acknowledgments

Include an acknowledgments page when you want to give credit to people
who have assisted with the project. When such recognition is included in
the transmittal message, the acknowledgments page is omitted.‐

Acknowledgments are often written in the first person, even if the
report itself is written in the third person. The following example
demonstrates appropriate acknowledgments for the report prelims
presented in Figure 1.7.

Acknowledgments:

Many people contributed to the success of this study, and I am grateful
to all of them. A special thank you goes to several who contributed in
unique ways.

Aaron Everette of the Hatfield-McCoy Mountains Coalition is primarily
responsible for this project. He entrusted Penworthy Research Associates
with the research assignment and gave valuable advice during the early
stages of the project. His suggestions and perceptive questions helped
to clarify the objectives of the project and determine the best ways to
accomplish those objectives.

Individuals visiting tourist sites in the Metro Valey and New River-‐

Greenbrier regions willingly provided information about their travel

expriences and perceptions of the Hatfield-McCoy Mountains Region.

Their candid comments provided the data necessary to gain a perspective
on potentially successful promotional strategies. Without their
assistance, we would not have been able to produce this report.

To all, a hearty “Thank you.”

Arlene W. Sherman

Director of Market Research

Penworthy Research Associates, LLP

Executive Summary

The executive summary, sometimes called a synopsis, immediately precedes
the report body. Typically, an executive summary includes the research
problem, purpose, research methods, major findings, conclusions, and
recommendations. The executive summary—a condensed version of the entire
report—must contain enough information to help a reader decide how much
of the full report he or she should read.

One technique for drafting an executive summary is to reduce each major
section of the report to one paragraph. After condensing the report in
that way, you can revise the draft by arranging the paragraphs into the
desired structure and adding transitions to link the paragraphs into a
coherent summary. Note: Although an analytical report may be written in
inductive (indirect) structure, many readers prefer that the executive
summary be written in deductive (direct) structure, beginning with the
recommendations. See Figure 1.7f, p. 39.

Some executives prefer that the summary be no longer than one page. The
length and complexity of the report, however, most often govern the
length of the executive summary. Unless instructed to do so, do not feel
that you must limit the summary to one page.

Report Body

Whereas the preliminaries provide a context for understanding the report
and a summary of its contents, the body of your report must contain all
details of the study. Since the report body should be a coherent unit,
it begins with the report title, placed approximately 1.5 in. from the
top of the first page of the report body.

Write the report body so clearly and completely that a reader will
understand its contents even if the person merely skims the preliminary
parts. When the report is written in inductive structure, the title is
followed by

coherent introduction

complete presentation, discussion, and summary of findings

(informational report ends here)

conclusions and recommendations (analytical report only)

The body of an analytical report written in inductive structure begins
on page 1, immediately after the executive summary, as shown in Figure
1.8a,

p. 40.

[]

Figure 1.8a Body: Introduction

[]

Figure 1.8a Body: Introduction (continued)

Note: This main section of a research report is called various names,
including analysis, data analysis, discussion, findings, and research
findings.

[]

[]

Figure 1.8a Body: Introduction (continued)

Figure 1.8a Body: Introduction (concluded); discussion of findings

begins

[]

Figure 1.8b Body: Discussion of findings (continued)

[]

Figure 1.8b Body: Findings (continued)

[]

Figure 1.8b Body: Analysis (continued)

[]

Figure 1.8b Body: Research findings (continued)

[]

[]

Figure 1.8b Body: Analysis (continued)

[]

Figure 1.8b Body: Discussion of findings (concluded)

Figure 1.8c Body: Summary of findings and conclusions

[]

Figure 1.8d Body: Recommendations

Note: Statements in the recommendations section should not be identical
to those in the Executive Summary.

[]

Figure 1.8e Body: References

Introduction

The introduction provides all information necessary to understand the
remainder of the report. The introduction establishes the context for
interpreting the findings and conclusions.

Typically, the introductory section for a report written in inductive
structure includes the background of the problem, a statement of the
research problem and purpose, the scope of analysis, and the research
methodology, or procedures. Delimitations, limitations, and definitions
of terms may also be included.

If you prepared a comprehensive research proposal, you can draw much of
the information for the introduction from that document. Do not,
however, merely copy the proposal. Use only those parts that are
relevant and write in a style that is appropriate for a final report.
Suggestion: Again,

review the proposal in Figure 1.3 and note how its major points are
included in the introduction to the report shown in Figure 1.8a, pp.
40−43.

Note also that some parts of the proposal (such as the time schedule and
budget) would be meaningless in the final report.

Note: Report headings need not contain the words introduction or
problem. The topic, or functional, headings, used in Figure 1.8a are
customary. Regular consumers of research look for these, or similar,
headings. They skim the content for each topic and quickly discern the
who, what, when, where, and why of the research. In addition, they
swiftly evaluate the soundness of the research problem and procedures.
Therefore, you will aid readers by using these standard topic headings
to introduce your research reports.

Findings

The presentation and discussion of findings comprise the major portion
of the report. In this section, you must present a complete and clear
analysis of all data collected. For coherence, the final paragraph of
the introduction (as shown) or the first paragraph of the findings
section should contain a preview of how the findings section will be
organized.

The report need not contain an actual heading called “Findings.”
Instead, coherence should be achieved in this section through talking
headings and subheadings (like newspaper headlines). Talking headings
provide clues about the information in each section and lead the reader
through the analysis.

Headings Aid Discussion of Findings

Headings, like the report title, should be concise. Also, at each level,
headings should be parallel (same grammatical form or pattern) and
specific. Parallelism helps readers see the report’s organization and
the relationship of topics. Specifics in wording adds interest. In the
following

examples, both sets are parallel but not equally interesting. Specifics
in the second set makes an important difference for readers.

Nonspecific headings

Treating mild hypothermia

Treating moderate hypothermia

Treating severe hypothermia

Specific headings

Mild hypothermia: Warm the core and let the periphery care for itself
Moderate hypothermia: Do not allow the patient to stand

Severe hypothermia: Time for a scoop-and-run rescue

Figure 1.5 shows six grammatical patterns for report headings—all
equally effective.6

[]

Figure 1.5 Six parallel heading patterns

More than one pattern may be used in a report. For example, you might
use questions for Level 1 headings, gerund phrases for Level 2, and

imperatives or statements for Level 3 headings.

Visuals Clarify and Simplify Findings

When your report contains several visuals, identify each by a label,
number, and title, like in the List of Tables and Figures. A
well-written title for a visual answers the what and when questions
about the data, and in many cases the title should also answer who and
where. 7 For example, Microcom Sales by District, 2018 and 2019, is a
more meaningful title for a chart than Microcom Sales or Sales by
District. Titles of tables are normally placed above the table, while
titles of charts or figures may be placed at either the top or the
bottom. Remember to be consistent with your placement of titles.

Besides identifying the visual by label, number, and title, you should
identify the data source. If you used secondary data, that source may be
identified in a shortened form, assuming that full identification is
provided in the report’s list of sources. An example of noting a
secondary source is

“Source: Statistical Abstract of the United States, 2018.” If the data
are from a primary source, such as observation, experimentation,
interviews, questionnaire surveys, and searches through company records,
the simple notation “Source: Primary” is adequate.

The most effective placement of visuals is in the report body, not in an
appendix, unless you know that your main reader prefers to have visuals
grouped in an appendix. Visuals should be placed where needed for
emphasis, clarity, simplification, reinforcement, summary, interest,
credibility, or coherence. And a visual should be placed as near as
possible to the accompanying narrative. An effective three-step
procedure for incorporating a visual into a report is to introduce the
graphic, display it, and then discuss it.

Introduce the Visual

In the introductory statement, mention a key fact that the visual
illustrates.

Focus on the information contained in that visual, not on the visual
itself.

Following the introduction, identify the visual by number or title to
help the reader locate it in the report. If the visual is on another
page, also include the page number in the identification. The following
examples contrast less effective and more effective introductions.

Less E ective: Illustration 1 shows sales for oatbran, rice bran, and
wheat bran in 2018.

More E ective: Oat bran substantially outsold both rice bran and wheat
bran in 2018. (See Illustration 1.)

Less E ective: As Figure 1 shows, a research plan contains 12 parts.

More E ective: Planning research is a 12-part process, as demonstrated
in

Figure 1, page 4.

Display the Graphic

Following the introduction, display the visual as soon as possible.
Separate the visual from the narrative with additional blank space or
horizontal lines to achieve contrast. Some report writers include a 2-
to 3-in. column on the left of each page and place small, simple
graphics in it, beside the introduction on the right; but, integrate
larger illustrations with the text as just described.

If space permits, place the visual on the same page as the introduction.
If the visual does not fit on the same page, do not leave a large patch
of blank space at the bottom of the page; just continue with your
discussion and place the visual at the top of the next page.

Visuals must fit within the margins of the report narrative and should
not be so large that they distract from the narrative. If necessary,
reduce the

visual so that it will fit attractively within the report margins while
retaining legibility.

When large visuals must be used, they may occupy a full page and may be
placed vertically or horizontally. Whenever possible, display full-page
visuals on the page immediately following the one on which the visual is
introduced.

Discuss the Illustration

While a visual can add interest to a report or summarize essential
information, it is your responsibility as the report writer to interpret
the data in that visual. After introducing and displaying the visual,
discuss it in an interpretive manner. Interpretation requires more than
merely repeating the data presented in the visual. Your discussion must
clarify data or add details that cannot be captured visually.

When your discussion requires only one paragraph, you may combine the
introduction and discussion. In that situation, display the visual after
the discussion. If the discussion is lengthy, however, the introduce-
display-discuss sequence is more effective. The proper pattern for
introducing, displaying, and discussing visuals is demonstrated in
Figure 1.8.

Source Citations Aid Credibility

Writers of business reports using secondary data usually acknowledge
their sources for several reasons. Acknowledging sources separates the
content you borrowed from your original ideas. Also, it enables other
report writers to find the data you used and build on it in their
research. Your contemporaries in business and academics expect the
honesty documenting sources represents. Additionally, citing sources
helps prevent a lapse in ethics called plagiarism.

Copyright infringement (reproduction, or lifting, of an author’s content
into another’s work without permission) violates Federal laws governing

intellectual property and may result in criminal penalties. However,
U.S.

copyright laws do not apply to simple notions, most material published
before 1923, so-called common knowledge, and material in the public
domain. In deciding claims of copyright infringement, courts apply the
doctrine of fair use. Fair use is determined by careful consideration of
the type of copyrighted material, how that material is used, proportion
of the copyrighted work reproduced, and the effect of lifting on sales
of the copyrighted content.

To avoid plagiarism in your reports, follow these guides. 8

Create a citation for any precise wording as well as facts and ideas
that you pick up during your research.

Know what citation styles are available to you. If possible, settle on
one style, such as APA ( Publication Manual of the American

Psychological Association), 9 to use for every report.

Become adept at writing original summaries of source content.

Loose paraphrasing (reproduction of an author’s wording with a

few words replaced by synonyms) is never appropriate.

When in doubt about the need to cite a source, cite it.

Know the results of plagiarism in your academic institution or

profession.

Use an online plagiarism checker, such as iThenticate

(www.ithenticate.com) or Turnitin (http://turnitin.com).

To avoid copyright infringement, follow these guides when writing and

presenting business reports.10

Assume that all current intellectual property except U.S.

government publications is copyrighted.

Use quotations sparingly; quote infrequently and just enough to make
your point.

Before lifting a block of copyrighted content, send a written request
for permission to the copyright holder.

If told to cease from using lifted content, do so promptly. An

apology may help you avoid copyright infringement charges.

Cite each source in the report text, according to the style manual you
have adopted. The APA Style Manual, along with several style manuals,
recommends source acknowledgments inserted in parentheses and calls this
citing method author-date notes, also known as in-text citations or
parenthetical documentation.11 The following guides will cover most of
your reporting situations. Consult your style manual whenever you

encounter circumstances not covered here.12

When citing in your text, these guides will help you achieve the
accurate results that readers expect.

Generally, insert both the surname and year in parentheses with a comma
separating them.

Example: More and more organizations of various types have

discovered the value of enterprise social media (ESM) and are

expanding use of it (Anders 2016).

If you include the author’s name in your narrative, place only the
publication year in parentheses after the name.

Example: According to Anders (2016), professional work is

increasingly collaborative, social, and virtual.

When the publication year is included in the narrative along with the
name—perhaps because you want to emphasize the recency of

the data—omit a parenthetical reference.

Example: In his 2017 study, Anders noted growth in ESM; that is, an
organization’s use of social media platforms such as LinkedIn and
Facebook to connect people internally and externally who

share business activities or interests.

If you quote a printed source directly, include the page number in the
author-date note.

Example: “Supporting these trends, research has noted the

growing use and importance of ESM for many types of

organizations” (Anders 2016, p. 224).

If you quote an online source directly and page numbers are

missing, use paragraph numbers. If no paragraph numbers appear in the
document, cite the section heading and then cite the paragraph number by
counting down from the heading.

Example: “The good thing about mistakes is that we learn the

most from them” (Fulton, “Keep Calm and Carry On,” para. 2).

Observe the author-date notes in Figure 1.8b, report pages 4, 6, 8, and
9.

Each in-text citation should be listed fully under References, at the
end of the report body.

Report Summary

Information and analytical reports should always contain an overall
summary of the findings. When the analysis is lengthy and complex, you
should also summarize your discussion of the findings at the end of each
major section. For an information report written in inductive structure,
the summary marks the end of the report content. In an analytical
report, the

summary may occupy a separate section, as is shown in Figure 1.8c, p.
50, or may be included in a section with the conclusions and
recommendations.

Conclusions and Recommendations

When analytical reports are written in inductive structure, the
conclusions and recommendations constitute the final section or sections
of the content.

Conclusions must be logical inferences supported by the data analysis,
or findings. As you draw conclusions, you are moving further from the
objectivity of the collected data and relying on your perceptions of
what those data mean. To avoid unwarranted subjectivity in conclusions
and to state them effectively, follow these guides:

Conclusions must not be a mere restatement of the findings.

Conclusions must be objective and flow logically from the analysis.

If the data contradict anticipated outcomes, you must put aside your
expectations—or those of the person who authorized the study—

and base conclusions on the available data.

Conclusions must be relevant to the stated problem and purpose of the
report.

Several findings may be used to support a single conclusion. You need
not draw a conclusion from each major finding. On the other hand, one
major finding may lead to more than one conclusion.

You should always review your conclusions to ensure that your data

analysis (findings) supports them. See Figure 1.8c.

Recommendations propose actions that are justified by the findings and
conclusions; recommendations may also suggest other research that should
be undertaken. Recommendations are most meaningful when they are

related to the stated purpose of the study. Notice, for example, the
relationship of the purpose, conclusion, and recommendation in the
following example.

Purpose:

To provide information that would help the Hatfield-McCoy Mountains
Coalition promote the area more effectively to resident and nonresident
tourists.

Conclusion:

Tourists’ knowledge of and interest in the area is too low. Confusion
within and among some of the state’s official tourist publications does
little to stimulate interest in the area.

Recommendation:

Promote the state parks in the region … Do not depend on the state to
provide adequate publicity about the region’s state parks.

See the recommendations in Figure 1.8d, p. 51. Then review the
conclusions in Figure 1.8c to see the connection between them.

When writing the conclusions and recommendations, ensure that all
information to support them is in the data analysis sections. Some
writers, perhaps in a mistaken attempt to compose a dramatic ending to
the report, introduce new data with the conclusions or recommendations.
That practice tends to confuse the reader and destroys report coherence.
For example, in

Figure 1.8b (bottom of page 9), a writer might be tempted to withhold

information about coverage of the region in the West Virginia official
tourist guide. Such a writer might think that the information would give
final, solid justification for the conclusion drawn later and the
recommendation based on it. However, since the data about coverage in
the guide is closely related to respondents’ perceptions of the region,
it should be—and is—included as part of the findings.

The conclusions and recommendations indicate completion of the analysis.
However, the inclusion of author-date notes in the findings section
requires adding a list of data sources, or references, to end the report
body.

References

The list of secondary data sources is titled References by the APA13 and
Works Cited by the Modern Language Association (MLA).14 Each is a list
of publications cited in your report. Note: A bibliography and list of
works consulted are similar, but bibliographies usually include
publications you consulted for background information but did not cite
in the report body.

Following the last content page, the references are listed
alphabetically.

See Figure 1.8e, p. 52. Generally, references should include these
details: author name, publication date, title of the work, publisher,
and page numbers when applicable. Also, references are listed in
alphabetical order, usually by the author’s last name. If an agency,
association, or institution is the author, alphabetize by the first
major word of the organization’s name.

If no author is named, move the title to the beginning of the reference;
alphabetize the reference by the first major word of the title. Figure
1.6

shows various references (APA style). To reference a source for which no
example is given, follow patterns in the available examples. For more
precise referencing, see the APA manual.15

[]

[]

Figure 1.6 Reference examples

Omit any personal communications from the references list because
conversations (including in interviews and by phone), e-mail, letters,
memos, texts, tweets, and voice mail generally do not include
information that a reader could recover and verify.

Citation management software, such as Citefast (http://www.citefast.com)
or Writing House (http://writinghouse.org), do not eliminate the need to
know basic rules of citing and referencing. However, these online
programs do save considerable time and effort for a busy
researcher-writer.

The references list indicates completion of the report body. Some
situations warrant use of supplements, which provide supporting
information.

Report Supplements

The supplements to a report include any information that may be useful—

but not essential—for understanding the analysis, conclusions, and

[]

recommendations. Supplements may include a glossary, an appendix or

several appendices, and an index. Report supplements are shown in Figure

1.9a–d, pp. 53–58.

Figure 1.9a Supplements: Glossary

[]

Figure 1.9b Supplements: Interview guide, page 1

[]

Figure 1.9b Supplements: Interview guide, page 2

[]

[]

Figure 1.9c Supplements: Visitor’s checklist

Figure 1.9d Supplements: Profile of the participants, page 1

[]

Figure 1.9d Supplements: Profile of the participants, page 2

Glossary

A glossary—a list of selected words with their meanings—is required only
when the report contains terms that may be unfamiliar to some readers
and when those terms have not already been defined in the body of the
report.

Including a glossary is advisable when the readership consists of some
persons who know the technical terminology and others who do not. That
practice provides definitions for readers who need them without
cluttering the report with information that is unnecessary for many
readers. If the report contains few technical or unfamiliar terms or
words are given a specific meaning in the report, those terms may be
included in the introductory section of the report, as is done in Figure
1.8b. The report also includes a glossary; see Figure 1.9a.

Appendix

An appendix includes any items referred to but not displayed in the
report body. Similarly, all items displayed in the appendix must be
identified at some point in the report. Do not use the appendix to
“share” interesting but nonessential information. Materials often
displayed in an appendix include copies of transmittal messages and
questionnaires (Figure 1.9b) or interview guides (Figure 1.9c),
tabulations of data (Figure 1.9d), and statistical formulas, graphs,
charts, and diagrams. Remember, however, that visuals intended to
clarify, emphasize, or summarize parts of the report should be
incorporated into the report narrative unless you are specifically
requested to group them in an appendix.

Index

An index—such as the one ending this book—is a list of key words and
topics found in a report, along with the page numbers on which those
words and topics appear. Generally, an index is included only if readers
will be

unable to locate essential information without it. In most situations,
however, a comprehensive table of contents along with clear, concise
division headings will suffice to direct the reader to specific topics.

As you select parts to include in your report, remember that your
objectives are to establish rapport with report readers, stimulate
interest in the report, and facilitate its use. Include all parts that
will help you achieve those objectives.

Varying Report Parts

The parts for a formal research report should be adapted to meet your
specific reporting requirements. Be mindful of your audience and include
all parts that will assist your readers. For example, when you must
prepare an information report, you would include all parts except the
conclusions and recommendations. In some contexts, the report summary
may be included in the transmittal message, eliminating the need for a
separate executive summary.

Nontraditional Title Page

For the title page you may use a creative format that effectively
conveys the required information. A nontraditional title page format is
demonstrated in

Figure 1.10.

[]

Figure 1.10 Nontraditional title page format

Always showcase the title on this page, placing it above and in a larger
font than other information.

Separate Transmittal Message

Instead of binding the transmittal message in the report, as shown in
Figure

1.7c, some writers prefer to present it as a separate transmittal
message

accompanying the report. Figure 1.11 provides an example of a separate
transmittal message accompanying the report. In this example as the
transmittal letter indicates, the report will likely be circulated
outside the organization for which it was prepared. Therefore, the
separate transmittal letter is appropriate.

[]

Figure 1.11 Separate transmittal message, including acceptance and

authorization

In this example, as the transmittal message indicates, the report will
likely be circulated outside the organization for which it was prepared.
Therefore, the separate transmittal letter is appropriate.

Executive Summary in Visual (Infographics) Form

Infographics format largely replaces textual descriptions of data with
visual representations of the data. (In fact, another name for
infographics is data visualization.) A trend in business research
reporting is to prepare the executive summary as an infographic, as
shown in Figure 1.12, p. 62.

[]

Figure 1.12 Executive summary infographic

Three key points support this trend.16

The brain processes images faster than words.

Pictures inherently are more interesting than text.

Visual information is retained better and longer than textual

information.

Recall, the executive summary contains the complete report in condensed
form. Remember, also, some report readers will read only the executive
summary and decide they need not read the full report. Thus, some report
writers contend, an infographic executive summary is a necessity,
despite the additional time and effort involved in creating it.

Initially, business people created infographics using imaging and design
applications, such as Adobe PhotoShop. Today, though, they are more
likely to use tools called infographics makers, many of which are
available online at no cost. The following list names popular online
software for creating infographics.

Easel.ly (www.easel.ly)

Get About (www.get-about.com)

Infogr.am (infogr.am)

Piktochart (piktochart.com) Venngage (venngage.com)

When using an infographics maker, follow these guides.17

Become thoroughly familiar with your data and the story it tells.

Identify what you want readers to take away from your visual

report.

Sketch a storyboard, laying out the data-story left to right and top to
bottom.

For the small amount of text involved, use unusual fonts that are also
very readable.

Choose calm, harmonious colors, avoiding a white background and dark and
neon colors. The rule of three is reliable for color

selection: three complementary colors with the lightest in the

background. If you need more colors, use shades of the original three.

As a test, ask someone unfamiliar with your data to interpret your
infographic report.

Report Body in Deductive Structure

In Figure 1.8, as already observed, the writer used inductive structure,
starting with background information, followed by the scope and purpose,

… and ending with conclusions and recommendations. However, if the
reader’s preference or likely reaction justifies your use of deductive
structure, recommendations and conclusions may be presented at the
beginning of the report. The opening pages of a report presented
deductively are shown in Figure 1.13.

[]

Figure 1.13a Introduction of report in deductive structure, page 1

[]

Figure 1.13b Introduction of report in deductive structure, page 2

Following a description of the scope, include all other introductory
parts of the report as shown in Figure 1.8a, followed by the findings,
and ending with the report summary.

Formatting Prelims, Body, and Supplements

As you prepare your manuscript, attempt to determine your reader’s
preference for margins, spacing, headings, and page numbering. One way
to determine a reader’s preference is to ask; another way is to look in
the company files to find examples of report styles in use. Some
companies and government agencies publish office manuals (printed or
online) for their employees. Those manuals often include formats and the
requirement that all reports follow the approved formats.

Some writers find that templates in word processing software are useful;
other writers think those templates give a “canned” look. A template
includes samples of default colors, fonts, graphics, headings, and
visuals.

When using a template, select one that complements the report’s style
and level of formality. Also, ensure that the template applies protocols
for margins, spacing, placement of headings, and pagination that are
acceptable to your audience. If not, modify the template to meet your
reader’s preferences and save it with a different file name.

Format Guides for Prelims

Page numbering is the focus of these guides. The following paragraphs
also mention several advanced software features to assist you with
preliminary pages.

Number Preliminary Pages

Traditionally, each of the preliminary parts begins on a new page—except
for a list of tables and figures that fits on the table of contents’
last page. As shown in Figure 1.7, the preliminary pages are generally
numbered with lowercase Roman numerals, centered in the page footer. Use
the numbering scheme for preliminary pages shown in Figure 1.14.

[]

Figure 1.14 Page numbering for report prelims

While preliminary pages are numbered with lowercase Roman numerals, the
report body pages and supplements are numbered with Arabic numerals.

As noted, the recommended placement of those page numbers differs, too.

You might handle these differences by creating the preliminaries and
report body in separate files. Otherwise, access Help in your word
processing software and determine how to include different numbering
schemes in one file. Note: In Microsoft Word 2016, the key is to insert
a section break between the prelims and report body. Also, make sure the
two sections are not linked. Then, set the page numbering for each of
the sections (steps provided in Help).

Insert Report Cover and Title Page

Naturally you can generate a report cover and title page, as made in

Figures 1.5a and b and Figure 1.10. To save time and effort, you may opt
for a cover or title page template if your software provides one. Note:
Using Word 2016, you can insert a cover and title page from the Insert
tab.

Insert a Blank Page

Sometimes you may want to insert a blank page between text pages of your
report. In the prelims, for example, you may want a blank page to serve
as a placeholder for the transmittal letter. You would print the letter
on your organization’s letterhead as usual; then remove the blank page
and insert the letter in its place before binding the report. Likewise,
in the body of a

report, you may need to insert a blank page to represent an oversized
visual to be added later. Note: In Word, a blank page can be inserted
from the Insert tab.

Insert a Table of Contents

Your word processing software may streamline preparation of your
contents page. First, you must apply heading styles to Level 1 and Level
2 headings in the report, the only levels included in a table of
contents. The software uses these built-in heading styles to compile a
table of contents. Note: In Microsoft Word 2016, you can customize the
contents page. In Word Help, search for “create a table of contents in
Word.” Directions include how to apply heading styles and how to add the
table of contents. Then search for

“custom table of contents” to see adaptations you can make.

Format Guides for the Report Body

If your organization does not specify a report format and you cannot
determine the preferences of your report readers, apply the following
guides.

Margins and Spacing

Top, bottom, and side margins should contribute to the appearance and
readability of the report. Figures 1.7, 1.8, and 1.9 comply with the
guides for business report margins shown in Figure 1.15.

[]

Figure 1.15 Margins for business research reports

*Varied to achieve balanced appearance.

Source: Kuiper and Clippinger (2013, p. 482).

Notes: Top, bottom, left, and right margins of 1 in. are usually the
default setting in word processing software. To facilitate setting wider
margins, display the ruler in your software (View tab in Microsoft Word
2016). Report pages in this chapter are formatted as an unbound
manuscript to conserve space.

Although some readers may prefer double-spaced manuscripts with indented
paragraphs, most contemporary business reports are single-spaced with
paragraphs not indented. Whenever you use single spacing (or Multiple
spacing in Microsoft Word), insert extra space between paragraphs. A
setting of 8, 10, or 12 points (pt.) below each paragraph is appropriate
when used consistently. Note: Space between lines, like font size, is
measured in points (1 in. = 72 pt. = 2.54 cm).

[]

Headings Format

Whether you use single- or double-spaced text, you should use
appropriate division headings to guide readers through your report. The
font style (all capitalized, lowercase, bold, underlined, and
italicized) and placement of the headings must accurately reflect the
organization of your report.

Style manuals differ in their guides for style and placement of
headings.

Most manuals, including APA, recommend capitalizing major words in the
report title, 18 rather than typing it in all capital letters.

Although most reference manuals suggest that the title be centered on
the first page, effective variations of title placement are shown in
Microsoft Word templates and other examples.

Remember, most document designers recommend that you not underline
headings because underlining can impair readability. Instead of
underlining, headings may be distinguished from the report text and from
other headings by variations in font style, color, and size. The title
and headings used for the tourism report are shown in Figure 1.16.

Figure 1.16 Levels of headings used in report body (Figure 1.8).

Headings at Levels 1 and 2 may be printed in a complementary color or
colors other than black. Medium to dark colors are appropriate to ensure
adequate contrast with a white or light background. Colors add visual
interest and are especially important for reports on the web. For widely
distributed printed reports, however, the use of multiple colors
increases costs.

Page Numbering

The report body and report supplements are numbered consecutively with
Arabic numerals. The numeral “1” is usually omitted from the first page
of the report body. Place numerals for subsequent pages in the page
header, aligned with the right margin, as shown throughout Figures 1.8
and 1.9.

Leafing through a printed report or scrolling a report file to find a
specific page is easiest when numbers appear at the upper right.

If you use two-sided printing on heavy paper, the first page of the
report body (after preliminary parts) should be on a right-hand page,
with no number printed. The numbers for subsequent odd-numbered pages
are aligned at the right margin; even-numbered pages, at the left
margin. Use the page number feature of your word-processing software for
consistent placement of page numbers. Note: In Microsoft Office 2016,
the Insert tab includes Page Number in the Header and Footer group.

Format Guides for References and Supplements

A references list follows a set format. In APA style, the first line of
each entry aligns with the left margin. All subsequent lines are
indented 0.5 in.

This format is called hanging indentation, and the hanging indent
feature in your word processing software will enable you to achieve this
format either before or after typing the references.

The font name and size for references should be the same as the report
body. If you opt for the convenience of citation management software,
such as Citation Builder (www.lib.ncsu.edu/citationbuilder) or Citation
Machine (www.citationmachine.net), the generated list will include
hanging indentations; and the sources will be listed in alphabetical
order. However, you may need to change the font and font size to match
the body text.

In references to web content, which may involve a mix of DOIs and URLs,
follow these guides for managing both kinds of document finder.

In reports to be printed, remove the hyperlinks. For online reports,
including PDFs, ensure that all links remain active: Test them.

If you create a references list from scratch instead of using citation
management software, copy the address (digital object identifier

[DOI] or uniform resource locator [URL]) from your browser’s

address field rather than type it into your list. Also, include the
protocol—usually http:// but watch for exceptions.

Prevent an overly ragged right margin by breaking DOIs and URLs before
or after punctuation marks.

In the supplementary parts, continue page numbering from the report
body. For supplementary parts you create just for the report, continue
with the same fonts and spacing. If you include a pre- formatted
document, such as a letter, memo, or questionnaire, insert it into the
report in its original format, which may not match pages in the report
body.

Alternative Presentations

The chapter introduced manuscript format for presenting research
reports, but two additional formats are needed to round out coverage:
report deck format and web format.

Report Deck Format

A report deck is created with presentation software, such as Keynote or
PowerPoint. But, report decks are meant to be understandable without a
presenter. Usually a report deck is sent as an e-mail attachment and
receivers read slide by slide from their computer screens. A report in
this format includes less text—and, therefore, less detail—than most
other report formats (but more text than most slide shows). 19 A report
deck relies

[]

on visuals (diagrams, graphs, and photos) more than text to convey
information and can be used for any kind of report.

A report deck offers several advantages over other formats20: One report
functions as a written report and as slides for an oral follow-up report
to a small group.

Presentation software is decidedly easier to use than word

processing software for placing visual elements precisely.

Generally, business people are more skilled at using presentation
software than word processing software.

Figure 1.17 shows pages (slides) from a report deck.

Figure 1.17a The contents page (slide) in a report deck

[]

Figure 1.17b Page from report body in slide deck

[]

Figure 1.17c References list in a slide deck

While these three pages contain mostly text, many intervening pages,
especially the findings (data analysis) section, contain visuals—charts,
graphs, maps, photographs, and tables—and little or no text.

Naturally, to be effective, a report deck’s content must be easy to
grasp.

Follow these content guides to aid your reader’s comprehension.21

Use a short-sentence headline, or title, on each page, left-aligned
rather than centered. Type the headline in sentence case; that is,
capitalize only the first word and proper nouns. Omit a period at the
end of statements but include a question mark at the end of questions.

Create content to reinforce the headline. Be sure that all text and
visuals on the slide support the statement or answer the question in the
headline. If you run out of space, create another slide with the same
headline. Never try to squeeze text or visuals on a report page.

Do not type paragraphs; instead, use concise sentences with space
between them. Bullets do become monotonous, so do not use them on every
slide in your deck.

Rely on visuals as much as possible to carry your information, with text
in a supporting role. Often, the charts, graphs, and tables in a slide
deck must be simpler than those in a manuscript. Therefore, a deck may
contain two or three times as many visuals as a manuscript

report.

To engage your readers, a report deck must be both attractive and
functional. Follow these design guides. 22

Create a title slide to serve as the deck’s title page. Besides the
report title, include the company name, author’s name, and the date.

Include a contents slide, listing the name of each report section. If
the report is long, include the starting page number for each section.

Hyperlinks may be inserted in these numbers to help readers

navigate the report.

Set your design features on a master slide to ensure consistency
throughout the report deck.

Use a solid background; omit any effects that could distract readers’

attention.

Resize the headline text box so it can hold two lines of size 24 text.
No text in the report deck should be smaller than size 18. Note: These
small font sizes undermine the effectiveness of a report deck for
presenting to a roomful of people. On typical presentation slides, no
text should be smaller than size 24 so that the content is visible to

everyone in the audience.23

In one of the upper corners, place a tracker, or header, showing the
section of the deck. And place a footer on each slide, including the
slide number, project name, and proprietary information.

Online Format

For distributing research on the web, you have three options. The most
common means involves converting a word processing file to portable
document format (PDF). This way, any report can be accessed from a
landing page or web page even though it may be unusually complex and
formal. Another means involves tagging a word processing file with
HyperText Markup Language (HTML) code. This method is practical for
relatively short, informal reports with few graphics. The third method
is a combination of the previous two.

PDF File

Uploading and linking a PDF to a website is recommended under these
circumstances.

The audience will likely want to print all or part of the report.

The report is too complex to lay out well as a web page. 24

Follow these guides when linking a PDF to a website.

Use the website’s content management system (CMS) to upload your
prepared file. If the website does not have a CMS, use a file transfer
protocol (FTP) to upload your file.

Use a size 12 or 14 font.

Limit report length to 60 pages or about 35 kb.

On the website, warn website users when a link wil open a PDF.

Compress any photographs in your report using an image optimizer, such
as one of the following programs.

Akamai (https://akamai.com)

Compressor (https://compressor.io)

Optimizilla (http://optimizil a.com)

TinyPNG (https://tinypng.com) Include convenient links in the report to
aid navigation. For example, insert a link into each heading or page
number or both in the table of contents and list of tables and figures.
Likewise, insert a link on each page of the report body to go back to
the table of contents.

HTML Tags

The success of a web page report depends largely on how rapidly readers
can download and then read, or scan, the page. In planning a web page
report, be aware that graphics and multimedia content lowers download
speed. So, include only the necessary visual elements. 25

Generally, a research report would require other modifications for the
web, making appearance and writing style less formal. Since most web
users scan content for only a few seconds before deciding whether to
leave the page or keep reading, deductive structure is essential. Thus,
the report’s main point (recommendation) can be in the opening sentence.
Then, to

increase chances that readers will continue reading, short paragraphs,
captivating headings, and short pages with ample blank space would be
necessary.26

Having the report in accurate HTML code is vital. Besides writing the
code yourself or engaging someone to do it for you, you may use one of
these tools to convert a word processing file to HTML.

Adobe Dreamweaver

(https://adobe.com/products/dreamweaver.html)

Blue Griffon (http://bluegriffon.org) NamoWebEditor
(https://www.namowebeditor.com)

In any case, follow these guides to enhance readability of a report in
web

format.27

Set light colors for backgrounds; then use a maximum of two or three
sharply contrasting font colors.

As a rule, use only two fonts—a sans serif font, such as Arial or
Tahoma, for text and larger, attention-grabbing fonts for headings.

Control line length—about 10 to 12 words (50 to 60 characters).

Resist any temptation to reduce letter spacing or leading (space between
lines) in order to squeeze more text onto a page.

Separate text from images with substantial blank space.

Choose emphasis techniques careful y: Use bold and ALL CAPS

sparingly. Use underlined text for links only. Use indented bullet
points liberally.

Give every page of your report the same “look and feel.” Use consistent
styles for each level of headings in the report.

Omit links within paragraphs to maintain consistent navigation. If links
are necessary in your report, place them at the ends of

paragraphs or in a menu.

The World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) has created the Web Accessibility
Initiative (WAI). Essentially, the goal of WAI is to make the web
available to people with a diverse range of hearing, movement, sight,
and cognitive ability. To date, not all WAI goals have been addressed
widely. The following lists include measures to make your web page
reports

accessible to people who have hearing or vision impairments.28

Add text alternatives (alt text) for al audio and visual elements. Thus,
web users reading with text-to-Braille hardware or text-to-speech
software can take in the graphics you include.

Likewise, provide a text transcript for podcasts and other audio
elements, making the information accessible to people who are deaf or

hearing impaired.

When your report includes a video, provide closed caption s or a sign

language version so that deaf and hard-of-hearing users can

understand the video.

Omit design elements, such as animation, that are unsuited for text-only
browsers; include adaptive tools, such as large-print software or voice
software.

Design for colorblind readers by omitting al references to colors from
navigation instructions. For example, asking readers to click the blue
button would be inappropriate.

Finally, test your web page report in the following ways to maximize
readers’ success. 29

[]

Test your web pages over a low-speed modem connection. If downloading
takes more than 7 to 10 seconds, consider removing images or

multimedia content.

Test your web page report on di erent computer monitors, including a
low-resolution monitor (800 × 600 pixels, for example).

Test your web report in di erent browsers, the most popular being Google
Chrome, Firefox, and Microsoft Edge.

These sets of guides impose constraints that make uploading a formal
research report like Figures 1.7, 1.8, and 1.9 an impractical
undertaking.

Combination

Using the combination method involves displaying a text-only abstract or
description on a web page, along with a link to the full report (PDF).

An example appears in Figure 1.18.

Figure 1.18 Online research report combining web content and

downloadable PDF

For each report on its website, The Business Research Company30 shows
four tabs: description, table of contents, and executive summary
(shown).

The fourth tab is a landing page for ordering the full report

The Centre for Business and Economics Research (Cebr) in collaboration
with Redwood Software offers another example of the combination method.
31 The first and last screen of web content appears in Figures 1.19a

and b; the middle screen was omitted here. Notice the bulleted list of
key

findings at the bottom of Figure 1.19b.

[]

Figure 1.19a Beginning screen of an online abstract

[]

Figure 1.19b Final screen of the abstract, including link to the full
report

The full informational report PDF contains 27 pages, including report
preliminaries (title page, disclaimer, contents, and executive summary),
report body (four divisions, five line graphs, and five tables), and
report supplements (two appendices). 32 The executive summary and two
report body pages appear in Figures 1.20a–c, pp. 82–84.

[]

Figure 1.20a Executive summary of an informational report (no

conclusions or recommendations)

[]

Figure 1.20b Report body page, demonstrating proper treatment of a

graphic

[]

Figure 1.20c Last page of informational report body, summarizing

research findings

Summary

Business research reports provide comprehensive data related to a
business problem along with interpretation of that data. Some of them
are strictly informative (offer no conclusions or recommendations) while
others are analytical (draw conclusions and present recommendations).

All effective research begins with a 12-step plan. All steps are
necessary but three are crucial: defining the problem that will be the
research focus; narrowing the scope to make the project manageable; and
determining data needs and how to collect that data (primary and
secondary sources).

Generally, business research reports are formal; and formal reports
contain parts that informal reports do not. Few reports include all the
preliminaries described in this chapter. The title page, table of
contents with list of illustrations, and executive summary are basic.
Add other prelims as readers’ needs dictate.

Use this checklist to maintain proper order and styling for the
preliminary parts.

 □ Included a cover or binder if you expect numerous readers to handle
the report now and in the future.

 □ Inserted yleaves in a printed report to raise its formality level and
provide space for notes.

 □ Put the concise, descriptive report title at the top of the title
page.

Identified the organization for which the report was created and the
organization that generated it. Also, showed the month and year the
report was finished.

 □ Used a personal style for the transmittal letter or memo, whether
included in the report or separate. The message contained one of more of
these subjects: a key finding, a major recommendation, an offer to
discuss the report or present it orally.

 □ Added authorization and acceptance letters or memos unless the
research was authorized and accepted orally or unless you covered this
content in your transmittal message.

 □ Provided a table of contents and list of visuals as an overview and
report navigation tool. Remembered to include prelims that follow this
page and any supplementary parts, as well as the number and title of
visuals in the analysis section.

 □ If the need for the study and the importance of the research are not
covered elsewhere in the report, included a preface containing this
information.

 □ Used an acknowledgments page to recognize individuals who assisted
you with the research and report—unless you prefer to include

acknowledgments in your transmittal message.

 □ Gave a complete rundown of the research and its results in the
executive summary. Since readers are most interested in your
recommendations, you may put them first (deductive structure) in the
executive summary, even if the report body ends with them.

The report body must include all details of the research in one coherent
unit. When you write a research report using inductive structure, review
it to ensure you have included these checklist items:

 □ a well-reasoned introduction;

 □ thorough presentation, discussion, and summary of research

findings; and

 □ conclusions and recommendations (analytical reports only).

The report introduction provides a context for understanding and
interpreting the whole report.

Ensure your report introduction includes the following elements.

 □ Background of the problem being researched

 □ Statement of the research problem and purpose of the research

 □ Scope of the study

 □ Research procedures used

 □ Delimitations

 □ Limitations

 □ Definitions of terms (or reference to a glossary if many terms
require defining)

As a researcher and report writer, did you fulfill these
responsibilities?

 □ collected data from secondary and primary sources;

 □ reduced these data to sets of meaningful information (data analysis);

 □ reduced the data sets to major findings (what the data reveal);

 □ interpreted the findings to produce conclusions and ‐

recommendations; and

 □ reported those findings, conclusions, and recommendations in a formal
report.

In any research report, the presentation and discussion of findings make
up the main section. In the findings section of your research reports,
make sure that you:

 □ Summarized your data visually (charts, graphs, and tables) when
appropriate

 □ Identified each visual with a label, number, and title

 □ Identified the source of data contained in the visual

 □ Placed each visual appropriately to reinforce surrounding text

 □ Used the introduce-display-discuss technique for each visual

 □ Interpreted the data for your readers, telling them what the data
mean in relation to the research problem

 □ Showed similarities and differences among data groups and

explained the differences

 □ Used parallel, varied headings that summarize content under each
heading

Conclusions, followed by recommendations, usually appear at the end of
the report body, immediately before the references. But some readers
prefer having recommendations, followed by conclusions, at the beginning
of the report body. Weather presented inductively or deductively,
conclusions must flow logically from the findings.

After writing the conclusions for your research report, use this
checklist to evaluate effectiveness.

 □ All relevant data and analysis are presented before any conclusion is
drawn.

 □ Each conclusion is closely related to the report’s stated problem and
purpose.

 □ Each conclusion is an objective statement supported by findings.

 □ Each conclusion interprets findings, rather than restating them.

 □ No conclusion introduces new information.

Recommendations are action statements based on the conclusions.

Review your recommendations, looking for the attributes on this
checklist.

 □ Each recommendation is justified by a specific conclusion.

 □ Each recommendation begins with an action verb.

 □ Each recommendation includes a plan for implementing it (if

needed).

 □ One or more recommendations involves further research on

questions that arose during your study.

If your report contains data from secondary sources, remember to refer
to (cite) them in the report body; in addition, end the body with a
complete list of those sources. Doing so greatly aids your credibility
as a researcher and writer—and it can help you prevent plagiarism.
(Citing sources alone cannot prevent copyright infringement, so stay up
to date on intellectual property laws in countries where you distribute
research reports.) In the list of sources, show the author name,
publication date, title of the work, and publisher in keeping with a
recognized style guide, such as APA.

A report’s supplementary parts contain related information that is
helpful but not essential to understanding the findings, conclusions,
and recommendations.

For your research reports, consider the usefulness of these supplements.

 □ Added a glossary only if the report contains many terms unfamiliar to
some readers.

 □ Used a separate appendix for each type of helpful, nonessential
information.

 □ Included an index if readers may need more help finding specific
information than the table of contents provides.

Adapt report parts to specific reporting situations. Know your readers
and include only the parts that will assist them.

An effective report format is both attractive and functional. Ideally,
the format motivates readers to respond to the report as you, the
writer, had hoped. An organization may adopt standards for its documents
and presentations and expect all writers in the organization to meet
those standards. In the absence of company standards, check your
manuscript’s near-final draft against this checklist.

 □ Spacing. The report uses single (or multiple) spacing for paragraphs.

Paragraphs are not indented.

Each paragraph has 8 to 12 points of space below it.

 □ Fonts. Paragraphs in a printed report are typed in a regular serif
font; but paragraphs in an online report are typed in a regular sans
serif font.

The paragraph font size is 10 to 12.

Titles and headings (Levels 1 and 2) are typed consistently in a
matching or contrasting display font (size 14 or larger).

 □ Headings. All Level 1 headings look alike; all Level 2 headings also
look alike—but different from Level 1 and Level 3 headings.

Heading words are capitalized properly: first and last words and all
other words over three letters.

The space below each heading matches the space between paragraphs.

No heading appears at the end of a page.

Every heading has at least a single-sentence paragraph under it. No
instances of a Level 2 heading immediately below a Level 1 heading can
be found.

 □ Margins. With minor exceptions, bottom, top, and side margins are the
same on each page and take advantage of the preset margins in word
processing software.

Every page has a 1 in. bottom margin.

Also, each page after the first has a 1 in. top margin—except when you
will bind the report at the top. In that case, the top margin is 1.5

in.

The report title (page 1) is about 1.5 in. from the top (2 in. for
top-bound reports).

Every page has a 1 in. left and right margin—except when you will bind
the report on the left. In that case, every page has a 1.5-in. left
margin.

 □ Page numbers. The title page is counted but not numbered. A page
number should show on all other pages.

Preliminaries are numbered with lowercase Roman numerals, centered in
the footer.

Body and supplement pages are numbered with Arabic numbers,

placed where they are easy to see at a glance.

Though created with presentation software, report decks are meant to be
clear to users without a presenter. Thus, a report deck is usually sent
as an e-mail attachment and viewed by the recipient on his or her
computer screen or mobile device. Generally, reports in this format
contain more visuals than text.

After generating a report deck, check your work against this checklist.

 □ A title slide shows the report title, company name, your name, and
date.

 □ A contents slide lists the name of each report section. A long report
includes page (slide) numbers and embedded links.

 □ The deck’s design is set on a master slide with a solid background.

 □ Each slide has a tracker (upper corner) showing which report section
the slide represents.

 □ Each slide has a footer, showing the slide number, project name, and
brand or copyright information.

 □ A headline statement or question in size 24 font appears in sentence
case atop each slide.

 □ Content below the headline supports the statement or answers the
question.

 □ Slides contain mostly visuals with some explanatory text.

 □ No slide contains a paragraph, and sentences are very concise.

 □ Bullet points are used occasionally, not on every page.

 □ No text is smaller than 18—especially if you will project the report
deck during a presentation.

To distribute research on the web, upload a PDF file for a long report
containing many visuals. For a short, simple report, tag the word
processing file with HTML code. Another option: Combine these methods.

Before linking a PDF to a website, use this checklist to help ensure
success.

 □ The report contains no more than 60 pages.

 □ Any photos in the report have been optimized, using a program such as
Compressor or Optimizilla.

 □ You have included an ample number of active links to aid navigation.

 □ You have someone to upload the report; or you are equipped to do so,
using the site’s CMS or an FTP.

 □ The website warns users that the link will open a PDF.

For tagging a report with HTML code, a program like Dreamweaver is
helpful.

With tags in place, check to be sure the codes will produce these
results.

 □ Light-colored background and dark-colored fonts (two or three)

 □ One sans serif font for paragraphs; lines of text at or under 60

characters

 □ Headings and paragraphs in different fonts

 □ Each heading level distinguished by variation(s) in font color, size,
and style

 □ Related information marked with indented bullet points

 □ Very few special effects (bold, CAPS, italics, and underline)

 □ Visual and audio elements accompanied by alt text.

Then, once the report is on the website, test it as follows.

 □ Over a low-speed modem to ensure ten-second download

 □ On a low-resolution computer monitor to ensure undistorted

viewing

 □ In several leading browsers also to ensure satisfactory viewing

Take these steps to combine the PDF and HTML methods for distributing
research on the web.

 □ Upload the full report in PDF.

 □ Insert HTML code in a text-only abstract; post this tagged file to
the website.

 □ Below or beside the abstract, insert a link for opening the PDF.

* This chapter’s business research report was created for illustration
purposes only. Penworthy Research Associates, LLP, is a fictional
company, and the interview data are hypothetical. Data about tourism in
West Virginia reflect past studies from that state’s tourism office. For
the latest information about West Virginia tourism access the website
(https://gotowv.com). There you can view press releases (Press Center)
on the subject, download a travel guide, and link to industry
information.

CHAPTER 2

Writing Business Plans

William R. Sandberg, PhD

Associate Professor of Management

Darla Moore School of Business

University of South Carolina

Creating a business plan is a special situation in business writing. The
business plan is a document that describes in detail the business
concept in an entrepreneur’s mind:

An unsatisfied need on the part of potential customers that creates an
opportunity for the entrepreneur

What the entrepreneur will offer to meet that need

Why and how the entrepreneur’s offering will draw customers away from
the alternatives available to them

The business plan also describes the various resources the entrepreneur
will employ to realize the business concept and the expected financial
results, usually projected under several scenarios.

A less formal way to think of a business plan is as a story. Its author
must introduce a cast of characters and develop a plot—but in a business
plan only a portion of the story has already taken place. Its most
important parts will unfold in the future, and the author’s job is to
describe those characters (including entrepreneurs, managers, and the
company itself), their motives for acting as they will, and the logic
that connects their actions to the goals they seek. Effective
storytelling makes an entrepreneur more successful at securing resources
to pursue the plan. Effective stories help in three ways:

Present factual information about the firm and its resources in a clear,
meaningful way.

Lay out the reasoning behind the plan.

Tie together the plan’s various parts to make a distinctive yet not so
far-fetched case for the business idea.1

Entrepreneurs and the Business Plan

A business plan serves as a road map to help your business get where you
want it to be. Use of this metaphor has become a cliché, but it
expresses an important truth about the business plan’s use and
importance.

Unfortunately, the business plan is not waiting somewhere for you to
download it. Instead, the business plan waits for you to create it.

Special Challenge of the Business Plan

The business plan combines vision and often novelty with concrete
information to offer a thorough, coherent argument for the proposed
business. Therefore, you will draw on your business research and
communication skills to present the results with a dual purpose: first,
to convince readers that your business concept is valid and you are
prepared to pursue it; and second, to persuade them to play a part in
making it real.

Seen in this light, your business plan is primarily a sales document;
its readers are various markets you have targeted, each for its own
reason.

When thinking of a sales document, most people picture an advertisement
or brochure that touts the benefits of a company’s product or service.
They may imagine unfailingly positive statements, glowing descriptions
of products and services, extravagant claims, and the heavy use of
superlatives, such as the most, best, biggest, and finest. However
effective such presentations may be in some sales situations, they are
disastrous in a business plan.

Think about industries in which you have worked or that you have
studied. You have likely noticed that:

Most organizations face competitive threats from rivals.

Most business strategies commit resources on the basis of

assumptions or estimates that may be wrong.

Most innovation encounters resistance from those who have

invested in the previous technology or arrangements.

Most any group of customers may change their preferences within a
product category or their spending priorities across categories.

In short, no new business venture faces only opportunity and promise; it
also faces threats and problems. A business plan that emphasizes the
venture’s bright prospects and downplays (or worse, omits) its risks
warns a reader that you as the entrepreneur are uninformed,
imperceptive, or dishonest—or that you underestimate the reader’s
business sense. Any of these judgments will prove fatal to your hopes of
convincing and persuading the reader. Instead, the business plan should
present your business concept to the best effect by recognizing its
risks and the problems you will encounter, coupled with the steps you
will take to reduce the risks or counter the problems.

Your plan’s readers will fall into two general audiences:

People who might work with you to implement it as your fellow

managers or employees.

People who can provide the financial resources or other means to
accomplish it.

Among the second group may be bankers from whom you hope to borrow
funds, professional investors who may buy an interest in your business,
and the managers of other companies that you seek as either suppliers or
customers. Members of these audiences have different reasons for reading
the business plan, concentrate on different aspects of it, and make
different uses of what they read.

Many of the readers also read business plans submitted by other
entrepreneurs who seek from them the same resources or cooperation that
you want; consequently, these readers will compare you to those other
entrepreneurs as well as consider your idea in some absolute sense.
Because most readers have many other claims on their attention, your
business plan must capture and sustain that attention, thoroughly
present the necessary information, and yet not overtax their scarce
time. Thus the business plan presents not only a special but also an
unusually complex situation in business writing.

Why Write a Business Plan?

Anyone who starts a business, even as a solo effort, would benefit from
writing a business plan. Those benefits include the following:

Through the necessary research you may discover overlooked

opportunities or competitive threats to your idea.

You may clarify your thoughts. For example, you may modify your business
concept to focus on a slightly different need or group of potential
customers, or conceive of a more effective way of meeting the original
need.

You may discover fatal flaws in your concept through research and
analysis rather than through costly trial and error.

Disappointed entrepreneurs often describe their failures in terms such
as If I had only known … or I didn’t expect … Often a business plan
would have revealed the problem.

Entrepreneurs and small-business owners sometimes rationalize their
failure to write a business plan by arguing that no one can expect to
implement a plan as written. New opportunities, unseen threats,
uncontrollable changes in a company’s markets or its supply sources, and
other possibly unimaginable conditions will arise, they say, and quickly

invalidate the plan. In this way of thinking, the effort and expense
devoted to a business plan become wasted resources, and the entrepreneur
would have been better off concentrating on production, sales, or
raising capital.

Here again the skeptics miss the potential value of a business plan.
Just as your research and analysis can discover both opportunities and
problems before you launch the business, they also give you a richer,
more instinctive understanding of the key factors on which your success
will depend. When events surprise you or performance does not meet your
expectations, that understanding will improve your chances of solving
the problems and saving your company. In the face of a crisis during
your organization’s early years, you will be stretched to your physical
and mental limits to keep the company going while identifying and
implementing the changes needed to save it. By the point of crisis, you
no longer have the luxury of stepping away from daily pressures to
rethink your strategy or undertake extensive research. Instead, you need
to have the information and understanding already in your mind and
recorded in usable form. If you start a business that requires more than
just your own money and individual effort, you will probably have to
write a business plan; and that document is likely to be among the most
important reports you ever produce. The people you approach for critical
resources or cooperation—potential partners, investors, lenders, members
of your management team, major suppliers or customers, and others—will
use the business plan to evaluate both you and your venture. Many of
them will insist on receiving it before fully considering your
proposition to participate or cooperate in the venture. Sometimes their
evaluation will be analytical and carefully thought out on the basis of
information you provide, and at other times it will be subjective and
perhaps quick-triggered on the basis of how well you seem to understand
your own business concept and plans. In either case, the business plan
will be pivotal in their evaluation of the business concept and of your

qualifications to carry it out and, therefore, in their response to your
proposition.

Components and Contents of a Business Plan

There is no standard template for a business plan. Experts generally
agree on what should be covered and how arguments should be made, though
there is no consensus on the sequence of a business plan’s components or
their precise titles. These experts and most of the people who will read
your business plan look for a clear, logically compelling presentation
of your business concept, the resources needed, and the expected
financial results.

Through experience they have learned that each business venture is
unique and that, within limits, there are many effective variations on a
“standard”

business plan. The key to successful presentation of your business plan
is to cover what readers expect and to organize the material so that
your arguments (for the proposed venture’s prospects, your qualification
to lead it, and the reader’s commitment to participate or cooperate in
the desired ways) are effective. In this section of the chapter, you
will learn about each component, what it should contain, and how to
maximize its impact.

Notes: The titles of the components used here are generic; in any
business plan you will want to create titles that focus on your business
concept. The components appear in a recommended sequence, though it is
possible that a slightly different sequence could be more effective for
a particular business plan.

Pages 130 through 167 contain Figures 2.1 and 2.2, a complete business
plan for KidSmartTM prepared by entrepreneurial MBA candidates who
sought venture capital investors to fund their company.* The remainder
of the chapter refers often to Figures 2.1 and 2.2. As you view
KidSmart’s business plan components and read its content, also read the
helpful annotations.

[]

[]

Figure 2.1a Business plan cover page

Preliminary Components

The business plan begins with several components that aid the reader in
quickly sizing up the proposed venture, understanding the entrepreneur’s
ideas, and anticipating more detailed arguments and information in the
plan’s main body. Though these brief preliminary components are the
first things the reader sees, they typically are produced late in the
process of writing a business plan. Like every other component of a
business plan, these important elements are included for good reasons
and can either help or frustrate your efforts to secure resources and
support for your venture.

Cover Page

The cover page is a business plan’s first page. As such, its purpose is
similar to that of title pages you have used on other business reports.

The cover page should include the following items.

Company name, address, and phone number

Web address, e-mail address, or both

Company logo or another identifying image

Name, address, phone number, and e-mail address of the company’s contact
person

Date of the business plan (to distinguish it from earlier or later
versions) and its copy number (so you can track how many copies you have
issued, and to whom)

Statement that prohibits copying of the business plan

Because the cover page influences a reader’s first impression of the
company, you must create a professional appearance: organize the
information and display it attractively. In addition, a business plan is
aserious document from which the reader hopes to extract essential
business information. The cover page is the first visual clue of your
care and competence. (See Figure 2.1a, p. 130).

[]

[]

Figure 2.1b Table of contents

[]

[]

Figure 2.1c Executive summary (continues on page 5 of business plan)

[]

[]

Figure 2.1c Executive summary (concluded)

Follow these guides when preparing the cover page.

Place the company name and logo in the upper half of the page.

Position the logo or other image where it achieves the best visual e
ect, whether above or below the company name. Avoid the temptation

to economize by using clip art or your own artistic rendering of a logo
or other image; either approach appears amateurish. Flashiness may or
may not be appropriate in the industry you are entering.

Therefore, study the logos and other images of successful firms in that
industry to see what tone they set. Because it is better to omit a logo
than to use one that presents you as bizarre, lacking business judgment,
or unable to afford a design professional, consider hiring a graphic
designer or artist to craft a similar, yet distinctive, logo or image
for your company. The resulting professional appearance

easily justifies the modest cost. If the contact person’s address and
phone number are identical to the company’s, you may list him or her
with the company information to avoid repeating these details.

Place the plan’s date centered in the lower quarter of the page,
followed a few lines lower by the copy number.

Table of Contents

The business plan’s second printed page should be a table of contents
showing an outline of the principal section headings and the page on
which each section begins. (See Figure 2.1b, p. 131.) The table of
contents plays a

crucial role in facilitating the reader’s navigation through your
business plan.

The following guides will help you prepare the table of contents.

If the plan’s sections typical y exceed four or ve pages, add secondary
headings and their page numbers, indented below their principal
headings. Note: In this case, consider trimming the length of the
business plan or some of its sections!

Include al appendices, identified by label (Appendix A, B, and so on),
title, and page number. Do not treat the appendices as one
undifferentiated lump named Appendix, or readers will abandon

their effort to find the supplementary information.

Ease readers’ navigation by inserting page tabs to locate principal
sections.

You want readers to persist in reading your plan. The moment the reader
loses interest and sets aside your document, you have failed to secure
the loan, investment, contract, management talent, or other resource you
sought. Research has shown that venture

capitalists read business plans by skipping from section to section,
seeking topics or information that would address the interests,

concerns, or questions that come to mind as they read.2 Other

categories of readers will likely skip through the plan as well.

Executive Summary

On the page immediately following the table of contents, the executive
summary usually is the first component to be really read. (See Figure
2.1c,

p. 132.) In no more than two pages, the executive summary offers a quick
look at the entire business plan. It is not an introduction to the
business plan

nor an identification of the topics covered. Instead, the executive
summary makes the following points.

Essence of the business concept

How the entrepreneur will pursue that concept

The expected results

The proposition placed before the reader. Note: Your aim in the
executive summary is to win the reader’s further interest and, if
possible, his or her tentative acceptance of your logic as you build
your arguments throughout the plan.

Given the critical nature of the executive summary, keep these guides in
mind when writing it.

Do not exceed two pages. Exercise selective judgment to distinguish the
most important points from the details in your business plan.

You must be able to identify the keys to success in your business idea,
if you are to succeed in its execution. Savvy readers know this fact and
use the executive summary as a screening device, often reading no
further before abandoning interest.

Write al other components of the business plan before writing the
executive summary.

Devote more attention per page to the executive summary than you are
likely to give to the writing of any other section.

Write the executive summary from scratch so it accurately presents the
business plan’s main points in an inviting way. Avoid recycling
sentences or paragraphs from the body of the plan for two reasons: a.
The reader may notice and be put off by the verbatim repetition when the
same text appears in the body. By that point in the plan, you want

the reader to experience a comfortable familiarity with your reasoning
but not a sense of déjà vu.

b. Cutting and pasting to create the executive summary prevents you from
the difficult but rewarding job of articulating your arguments—(1) for
the venture’s viability and your qualification to launch it, and (2) for
the action you want each reader to take.

Recognizing the executive summary’s significance, authors of the
KidSmart business plan made this preliminary component Section 1 of the
body.

Body: Concept and Product

The body of a business plan consists of standard essential components as
well as other optional components. The sequence of components within the
body will vary according to the priorities and plans of the business
venture, but the components should fall into an order that logically
develops the entrepreneur’s arguments and the proposition offered to
readers.

Some experts recommend that the business plan begin with a general
company description or similarly titled section. This section elaborates
what appeared on the cover page (company name, location, and so forth);
tells whether the company is organized as a sole proprietorship,
partnership, or corporation; identifies the company’s industry and
products; explains its objectives; and recounts its history, if any. The
value of including this section lies primarily in ensuring that the plan
does not omit this important information. Its primary drawback is the
risk of starting the business plan’s body with dry, dull, unimaginative
information. Most of the information routinely included in the “company
description” either appeared on the cover page or can be presented
later, in covering the organizational plans or management team. With
these considerations in mind, you may begin the business plan’s body by
explaining the business concept. Note: For a brief

but thorough explanation of how to develop a business concept, see
Allen’s book about launching new ventures.3

The Business Concept

Recall that the business concept identifies an unsatisfied need on the
part of potential customers, what the entrepreneur will offer to satisfy
that need, and how this offering will draw customers away from the
alternatives they currently use. (See Figure 2.2a, p. 134, opening
paragraph.) In this section of the business plan you must concisely and
convincingly detail your business concept. What you write here will
establish the context for everything that follows in your business plan.
For example, the subsequent sections on the organizational plan and
management team will detail the human resources required to start and
build this company, not merely as a generic example of its line of
business but specifically as a company that pursues the kind of
uniqueness and serves the types of customers you identify here. Readers
will keep in mind the requirements implied by your business concept and
will assess your organizational plan and management team against them.

[]

Figure 2.2a Business concept (first paragraph only) and Figure 2.2b

Product description (continued)

[]

[]

Figure 2.2b Product description (continued)

[]

Figure 2.2b Product further explained

[]

Figure 2.2b Visual explaining KidSmart’s key product

[]

Figure 2.2b Product explanation (continued)

[]

Figure 2.2b KidSmart’s product explanation enhanced by a visual

[]

Figure 2.2b Product explanation (concluded)

[]

[]

Figure 2.2c Industry and market insights (continues through page 24 of

business plan)

[]

[]

Figure 2.2d Market description (continued to top of page 16 of business

plan)

[]

Figure 2.2d Market explanation (continued)

[]

[]

Figure 2.2e Venture strategies and plans (continues through page 18)

[]

Figure 2.2e Venture strategies and plans (continued)

[]

Figure 2.2e Venture strategies and plans (concluded)

[]

[]

Figure 2.2f Marketing plan to implement venture strategies (continues

through page 24)

[]

[]

Figure 2.2f Marketing plan (Phases 1 and 2)

[]

Figure 2.2f Marketing plan includes test marketing, as described in this

business letter

[]

[]

Figure 2.2f Marketing plan includes several catalogs of KidSmart

products

[]

[]

Figure 2.2f Marketing plan (Phase III)

[]

[]

Figure 2.2f Marketing plan (concluded)

[]

[]

Figure 2.2g Operational plan (manufacturing and distribution)

(continued to page 27)

[]

[]

Figure 2.2g Operational plan (manufacturing and distribution)

[]

[]

Figure 2.2h Management plan and management team (continued

through page 28)

[]

[]

Figure 2.2h Management team (concluded)

[]

[]

Figure 2.2i Financial plan for KidSmart (continues through page 36 of

business plan)

[]

[]

[]

Figure 2.2i Tables provide details of the financial plan

Figure 2.2j Pro forma financial statements

[]

Figure 2.2j Pro forma financial statements (continued)

[]

Figure 2.2j Pro forma financial statements (continued)

[]

Figure 2.2j Pro forma financial statements (concluded)

[]

Figure 2.2k Exit strategy and returns to investors

[]

Figure 2.2k Visual presentation of rapid growth and investor returns

[]

Figure 2.2l Risks and contingencies: “What if” comments on the business

plan

[]

[]

Figure 2.2m Future development ideas for KidSmart (continues on page

39)

[]

[]

Figure 2.2m Future growth ideas (concluded)

The following guides will help you explain your business concept.

Give speci c information about four aspects of the business concept.

Ο Company’s product or service. Do not emphasize the features

of your product or service. Do explain the venture in terms of the
customer needs it will fill through the product or service.

Example: An air charter service should not be described merely as
renting airplanes and the services of pilots; instead its mission might
be to provide rapid aerial transportation to locations not served by
scheduled carriers plus flyover services for aerial

photography and the location or evaluation of sites for property ‐

development.

An effective description of the air charter’s business concept

would include both the physical (for instance, the rental of

airplanes and pilots’ services) and the needs met by its services (for
instance, the motives that would lead business or pleasure travelers to
use private aircraft).

Ο Types of customer on which company will focus

Example: You would identify the groups of customers that are

your primary focus (such as executives plus sales and service

personnel with local companies who need to reach industrial

customers in territories not conveniently served by airlines, state
economic development officials, and representatives of

companies they are assisting in plant location decisions).

Ο Benefits customers will derive from the product or service

Ο Means for distributing the product or service

Example: Tell how your product or service will reach its

customers (for instance, direct mail and personal meetings with

executives of the companies known to need better air connections and
similar contacts with government agencies that undertake industrial
recruitment).

Ο Include photographs or quality drawings when they will clarify your
business concept. Whether to present illustrations in this section or
later, in a detailed description of the product, is your decision. If
your product or service is so novel that readers will need help to grasp
the concept, definitely include illustrations in this section. If the
product or service is more comparable to

existing products, the illustrations could wait.

Example: An entrepreneur proposing a fashion design boutique

included sketches of dresses and suits by his/her designer. The sketches
clarified the fashion concept underlying the proposed

venture and conveyed a sense of the designer’s talents.

Describe your potential primary customers in terms of how they differ
from other buyers. (Not every person or organization that is part of the
market is equally attracted to the benefits you will offer, able to pay
the price you will charge, or reachable through the distribution
channels you will use.) Describe the chief differences between your key
customers and other buyers who are less likely to respond to your
appeal. A more detailed description of primary customers will appear in
the Market section of your business plan.

State clearly the points that wil set your venture apart from its
rivals.

Explain the uniqueness of your product or service. Entry into an
industry and the market it serves is challenging under most

conditions but is especially difficult and unpromising if a venture will
merely imitate existing companies. You seek to persuade

investors, lenders, and others who may not thoroughly understand the
products and market you describe. Though the features may be obviously
different from those of rival products or services, you

will want to link those differences directly to the benefits they create
for customers.

Product Explanation

You have explained the product’s role in your business concept. The
benefits you outlined earlier are created through product features or
applications. Readers will want clear explanations of how the necessary
capabilities are embodied in your product. (See Figure 2.2b, p. 134,
second paragraph through p. 140.)

These guides will help you provide the product information the readers
need.

Elaborate on the product or service itself—its design, features, and
use.

What will enable you to provide customer benefits that competitors
cannot? Have you rethought a familiar service so it can be ‐

performed uniquely? If so, have you demonstrated its effectiveness?

Report the development status of the product or service if you intend to
modify an existing product or service in some new way. This topic may be
omitted when the product or service already is well established.

The topic is needed if your business concept rests on improving a
technology or its application. Note: Your company probably will have to
develop and test a prototype product or service before

beginning commercial operations. If so, you should report on the
prototype’s state of development and the steps required to bring the
product to readiness. The same is true of any improved production
process that the venture would use.

Address the chal enges of a new type of service. The business plan
should report the development of the service and any pilot operations

(small-scale, short-term tryouts to help you see how the service might
work in practice on a larger scale). 4

Example: a pioneering use of self-service in a business that has not
seen that concept. Customers would have to learn how to

perform the functions typically performed by an employee, and

the adoption of self-service might require the redesign of the

typical site of interaction with customers.

Note any protection available to the venture for its product, service,
or business concep t. Possible sources of protection include patents,
copyrights, trademarks, and licensing agreements. Consider also trade
secrets and the types of complexity that make imitation

difficult—not all proprietary information and processes are based on
legal protection.

Explain brie y how the venture wil acquire needed materials or other
process inputs. Even though a detailed operational plan follows later in
the business plan, readers may need this information at this point.

Pay particular attention to any input that is critical to the venture’s
strategy or that is not generally available.

Example: A fashion designer whose products required especially

fine woolen or silk fabrics explained how a reliable supply of

those fabrics would be assured. However, a designer whose

products were cut from a commodity fabric did not need to detail her
sources.

Example: Most restaurants would need only to ensure readers that
reliable restaurant food suppliers served their area, but one

specializing in fresh seafood while operating in Nebraska would need to
identify its sources of supply.

Describe directions for growth that derive from the initial strategy of
your venture. Directions for growth might include:

Ο additional lines of product or service that could be sold to your
primary customers.

Ο other customer groups that might become reachable from your

position in your primary market or segment.

Note: Directions for growth is an optional topic as not all ventures
have such prospects at their inception. It is better to remain silent on
product or service diversification than to offer far-fetched notions.

Body: The Industry and the Market

Your next aim is to demonstrate that an entrepreneurial opportunity
exists.

(See Figure 2.2c, p. 141.) An assessment of the possible opportunity
rests on two fundamental questions:

Do enough people or organizations have an unmet need and the ability to
pay for a solution?

Is it possible to overcome or evade existing competitors in entering,
capturing, and holding the market you seek?

How you sequence the sections on the industry and the market will depend
on which elements of your business concept hold the keys to
understanding your venture and to its success. Your coverage of industry
and market should open with the subject that is more central to the
uniqueness of your business concept:

If the unmet need results from insufficient industry capacity, or if you
propose an improvement in the production process, then your argument
depends primarily on characteristics of the industry (the producers or
providers of the product or service) and the individual firms it
comprises.

If the unmet need is one that incumbent firms have not noticed or that
customers themselves have yet to recognize, your argument

depends primarily on the characteristics of the market (the buyers and
their needs).

From this portion of the business plan, the reader should learn not only
about the industry and the market but also about your insight into them.
It is a grave error to treat this portion or its sections as a series of
separate essays. Here is what you must do instead:

Present an integrated portrait of the industry and market that

develops and sustains your key findings and conclusions about them and
about your venture’s place in them.

Lead the reader to your conclusions by stating them at the outset in
concise, summary form, then building the argument for them

throughout the section.

Success in your argument does not arise from repetition of the same
points or from the accumulation of assertions, but from careful
construction of the argument through the introduction and logical
integration of relevant information pointing to your conclusions.

Although a business plan certainly is not a business research paper,
your work on the industry and market must adopt many of the values and
conventions associated with that type of writing. For instance, you will
need to:

find, integrate, and use numerous sources of information. The

sources will range from published accounts in business or general news
media to your own specialized primary research. For example, you may
interview industry participants or representative customers to determine
their satisfaction with existing products, their interest

in an alternative such as you will offer, their sensitivity to price
versus other factors, or other issues.

combine what you glean from published sources with your own

investigation. It is crucial to the quality of your arguments that you
push beyond the standard sources—such as Standard and Poor’s, Moody’s,
or Hoover’s, useful though they are for a starting point—to write your
own creative analyses.

The Industry

Your industry analysis should show a thorough understanding of the
overall industry and an assessment of your potential for profit within
that industry.

Follow these guides to give an effective description of the industry.

Tel how large the industry is, its stage of development (for example,
introduction, growth, maturity, and decline), and its potential for
growth beyond this point. Introduce quantitative data from authoritative
sources whenever possible. Do not use hyperbole!

In describing a particular industry, refer to appropriate kinds of
quantitative data as shown in the following examples:

Example: number of establishments operated by its firms, such as number
of pizza restaurants

Example: physical output, such as tons of steel or number of

housing units built

Example: number of customers served, such as number of tax

returns prepared or dollar volume of sales

The appropriate and customary choices for data will vary from one
industry to another, and your study of the industry should make these
choices obvious.

Describe in detail the industry’s geographic concentration, if any, and
the patterns of di erence between regions. This discussion is likely to
include both quantitative and qualitative information. For example, you
might report that production capacity in your industry is

concentrated in the upper Midwest and New England, supporting

the statement with data on plants and their capacity, but also quote
industry analysts’ opinion that the most forward-looking

competitors are young companies on the West Coast. Similarly

diverse sources and approaches may describe trends, entry barriers, and
other patterns in the industry.

oroughly analyze and discuss the competitive forces your venture faces.

The pivotal point in this section should be your assessment of the
industry’s potential for profit. Many effective assessments rely on

the Five Forces model of Michael Porter5 to examine the impact of: 1.
Rivalry among firms already in the industry

2. The threat of new entrants

3. The competitive threat of other products that may substitute for
those of the industry

4. The bargaining leverage of the industry’s suppliers

5. The bargaining leverage of the industry’s customers

The stronger the effect of any force, the lower the industry’s

potential profitability. Therefore, your choice of which forces to
emphasize in your analysis must depend on their strength. Your

venture’s greatest competitive barriers or pressures on profitability
will arise from them.

Discuss the gross margins on sales that prevail in the industry, a topic
closely related to the industry’s long-run profit potential. Such

information gives you a clearer idea of the volume needed to break even
and serves as a reality check on your own financial projections.

Typical gross margins may depend on the market segments in which
companies sell or on the technologies they use, so you must be

careful not to settle for the first statistic you find.

The Market

Along with the industry, you must describe and discuss your venture’s
market. Not every possible customer of your industry is of equal
significance to your venture. Some customers are content with the
offerings of established companies; others will have unmet needs that
your venture is unprepared to resolve. Your venture’s strategy probably
cannot be tailored to satisfy everyone; instead it must match the
benefits you can deliver to customers who will respond to them. They are
your target market. Your task in the business plan is to define this
select group and estimate its likely

response. (See Figures 2.2c and 2.2d, pp. 141−43.) Following these
guides will help you define your target market and predict its likely
reaction.

Describe the primary and any secondary target markets of the venture,
using a mixture of quantitative and qualitative data. Draw from
qualitative data or observation a demographic or psychographic

portrait of the individual, household, or organization that typifies a
target market; then enrich it with hard numbers.

At the same time, discuss the customer needs that your venture

will serve. Even though you have identified those needs in

describing the business concept, elaborate on them in this section and
provide evidence that they are unmet to a significant degree within the
target markets. This section is the probable home for

any original market research—your own surveys, observations, and so on.

Integrate this information, rather than presenting such material in a
separate section. Explain briefly how you carried out the

research. Use an appendix for a detailed description of your

methods and complete results, if relevant.

Analyze the speci c competitors your venture wil face; identify and
discuss those rivals in detail. You broadly described the industry and
detailed the market segments your venture will target, setting the stage
for this analysis. Your competitors’ effectiveness in pursuing the same
market segments or in repelling your entry can decide your

venture’s fate. Readers will know that correctly identifying an unmet
need does not ensure that your venture will succeed in that market. In
addition, readers will want proof that you understand this reality and
evidence that your plan will withstand the competitive efforts of your
rivals.

Compile the fol owing information and assessments of each rival for your
target markets.

Ο The company’s product line

Ο The features and customer benefits it provides

Ο Principal competitive methods

Ο Price to consumers (and to intermediaries, if applicable)

Ο Strengths and weaknesses as a competitor

Note: This information lends itself to presentation in a table within
your text. Use the text to highlight the most important competitors and
the opportunities or threats posed by them. Make your

discussion focused, rather than trying to summarize all the

information, which the table will show. An important exception:
Sometimes it is impossible or impractical to name specific

competitors, especially if they are indirect rather than direct

competitors for your target market. In such a case you should identify
the category or type of competitor.

Example: If your venture were a lawn care company, for example, you
might identify “casual yard services” comprising teenagers

who earn extra money by mowing lawns in their neighborhood—

it would be futile to try to name them, but overlooking the

category would omit a possible source of competition for your

company.

Body: Venture Strategy and Plans

From the foundation laid in analyzing the industry and market, you are
ready to build the strategy your venture will pursue. You can now argue
convincingly for the type and source of competitive advantage on which
you will rely in the market you have targeted and the strategic goals
you will seek. Then will come the detailed treatments of your plans
for-marketing, operations, and management. (See Figure 2.2e–h, pp.
144–56.) While this chapter’s coverage of plans for marketing,
operations, and management is less extensive than the discussion of
venture strategy, that difference does not mean that the plans are
unimportant or that they should necessarily be shorter portions of the
business plan. Instead, the difference reflects two considerations:

A company’s detailed plans for marketing, operations, and

management are particular to that firm. Here your objective is

tactical: You must ensure that each plan effectively carries out the
venture strategy by building and maintaining the necessary

competitive advantages. To do so, each plan must be consistent both with
the venture strategy and within itself. Do not fritter away resources on
activities that are unrelated to the keys to success for your company.

In the words of Kathleen Allen, “It is much easier to develop tactics

than to develop strategies.”6 Entrepreneurs are prone to answering

investors’ questions about strategy by detailing tactics while

neglecting the strategy they carry out. Although tactics are

important, the venture is likely to fail if the entrepreneur does not
articulate a well-considered strategy to guide the venture.

Venture Strategy: Differentiation or Cost Advantage?

Now that you have detailed the target market and principal competitors
your venture will encounter, you are prepared to state its strategic
goals (the competitive position and capabilities it will pursue) and the
advantages on which it will rely.

Earlier you described conceptually the uniqueness of the venture’s
product or service. Now you should explain concretely how your product
or service will differ from those of your rivals or how its costs will
be lower or both. Go into more detail than in that earlier, somewhat
basic explanation.

Relate the venture’s advantage to (a) its attainment through your
strategy (for example, the resources on which your venture relies, how
they will be organized or deployed); and (b) the customer needs it will
meet.

Example: The business plan for a gun club described the shooting ranges
and equipment to be included in the club’s facilities. It linked them to
the types of hunters and weapons that each one would suit, then
contrasted these features and benefits to those available at other gun
clubs in the geographic market. (The business plan had described the
rivals earlier in the same section.)

If your venture’s strategy relies on its cost advantage against rivals,
spell out how the advantage can be achieved. A cost advantage often is
not easily described before presenting a description of the
manufacturing or

operational plans, which follow later in the business plan. Even so, an
entrepreneur whose venture will depend on a cost advantage must take
extra pains at this point to describe the aspects of the venture’s
operations that will provide the advantage.

The uniqueness of the activities performed, how they are performed, or
how they are coordinated with one another is as important to the cost
advantage strategy as the unique benefits created for customers are to
the differentiation strategy. Cost advantages are notoriously difficult
for new ventures; consequently, your readers will require substantial
evidence to accept your argument.

Marketing Plan

In the section on the market, you identified your target market and
quantified its potential as much as possible. You also have explained
the advantage(s) on which your strategy depends. Now you should tell how
your company’s marketing plans will implement that strategy with respect
to the target market. (See Figure 2.2f, pp. 147–52.) Your readers will
look for thoroughness and savvy. Your marketing plan should be
comprehensive and detailed, crafted with insight into the workings of
the channels and customers with which you will deal.

Follow these guides to craft your venture’s marketing plan.

Include the fol owing information in your marketing plan.

Ο The distribution channels through which the product or service will be
sold

Ο The sales methods employed by the venture for each channel

Ο Advertising and promotion directed to each channel

Ο Advertising and promotion directed to final purchasers

Ο Alliances with other companies or organizations to advance the
venture’s marketing

Ο Other methods

Organize this section to emphasize the marketing e orts that are crucial
to the venture’s success, especially those on which the business
concept’s uniqueness depends. The sequence of topics within the section
is not fixed by any template; instead you should develop your

description logically around what you deem to be the most

important aspects of the marketing plan.

Operational Plan

The content of an operational plan will be quite different for a
manufacturing company than for a service company. Even so, the plan’s
purpose remains constant—it explains how the company produces what it
sells.

Use the following guides in writing an operational plan for your
venture.

For a manufacturer, describe the manufacturing process, including the
following details:

Ο the plant that will house the manufacturing process

Ο the types of production equipment and labor the process

requires,

Ο raw materials and their procurement

Ο how the production process will be controlled for efficiency and
quality

Ο any special considerations such as environmental impact or

process certification that will affect the company’s operations

For a service provider’s operational plan, detail the organizational
process by which the service is performed.

Example: An auto repair business uses a special facility and

equipment, manages the flow of vehicles through its various

functions, may organize work around specialized workers or all-

purpose teams, ensures its quality of service while minimizing waste of
materials, complies with environmental requirements in disposing of
fluids and batteries.

Example: A counseling service—a labor-intensive service that

uses little equipment—has a production process. Its operational plan
would cover its processes and facilities: private or group sessions or
both, appropriate space and furnishings for them, the scheduling of
appointments, methods to ensure quality, and other similar details.

Like the marketing plan, the operational plan is not fixed to a single
template. Concentrate on a logical presentation that emphasizes
the-activities and tactics that most directly affect the venture’s
strategy and competitive advantage. (See Figure 2.2g, pp. 153–55.) At
the same time you will indirectly advance the idea that you are
qualified to launch the venture.

Management Plan

Your objective in the management plan shifts to establishing your
qualifications and those of the management team you have assembled thus
far. You will need to think carefully about the duties and composition
of the management team before you write this section. At the time when
you are creating the business plan, it is not likely that the complete
management team has been brought together, or even identified. It is
advisable in your

preparation, though, to detail the skills required, the
responsibilities, and how the team’s managerial activities are to be
organized into positions. (See

Figure 2.2h, pp. 155 and 156.)

Follow these guides to write an effective management plan.

Open this section by brie y restating the key management roles and
requirements under the strategy. They are the basis for what you will
highlight in presenting the background, knowledge, and skills of the
management team. Note: Readers may study the management plan early in
their consideration of a business plan. But venture

capitalists and other serious investors typically look first at the
executive summary, the business concept, and the venture strategy; then
they turn to the management plan. These investor-readers want to know
what the team must accomplish before they evaluate its

qualifications. Therefore, provide that information at the beginning of
your management plan.

Careful y choose the content to include. The body of the business plan
is NOT the place for complete biographies. (Include résumés in an
appendix.) In a short paragraph devoted to each person, state his or her
position, qualifications, and duties.

Resist the temptation to inflate someone’s qualifications. Such
misrepresentation is unethical and may constitute fraud.

Professional lenders, investors, and other readers will see through your
ruse, either immediately or during subsequent “due

diligence” investigation of your proposed venture; and even the
appearance of such misrepresentation will ruin your chance to

enlist their support. It may also sully your reputation among the
close-knit community of venture investors and lenders in your

vicinity.

If a member of your management team lacks the necessary qualifications,
change the team or leave the position vacant. In that case, state your
plan for filling the vacancy and, if necessary, how its duties will be
covered in the interim.

Identify members of your board of directors, providing a short profile
of each that emphasizes his or her qualifications and unique

contribution to the venture. Then do the same for members of your
company’s advisory board, if you have one. Many of the venture’s needs
for management talent can be met through its board of

directors or through an advisory board.

Conclude your coverage of necessary talent by identifying the providers
of professional services required by the venture (for example, legal,
accounting, and insurance).

Explain your plans for ensuring an adequate supply of quali ed
employees.

Readers’ concerns will not normally extend to the identity of these
employees but will focus on their recruitment, selection, training, and
retention.

Body: Financial Plan

The purposes of the financial plan are to detail the venture’s financial
needs, how the funds will be used, the financial performance expected in
the next few years, and how investors and lenders will recoup their
money. (See

Figure 2.2i , pp. 157 and 158.)

As you approach the financial plan, be guided by these actions.

Begin with this fact in mind: Nearly al readers wil be keenly interested
in this section. Those who invest will become owners; those who lend
funds will become creditors; and those who agree to provide

supplies or other resources on standard terms typically will become
trade creditors. Other readers will have other reasons for their
interest in the financial plan. A company that considers making your
company a supplier will want assurance of its financial

stability: Will your company be able to meet its contractual

commitments? Even if your company possesses the necessary

technical skills and equipment, for example, its reliability as a
supplier will depend on its ability to obtain raw materials and other
purchased resources on a timely basis and to finance production and
shipment of its goods before it receives payment. Readers whom

you recruit for your management team will want assurance as well, both
of the company’s ability to pay their salaries and of its ability to
survive and grow. These various readers will focus on different aspects
of the financial plan, but each of them will use it to assess the
company’s soundness and evaluate your qualifications to lead it.

Proceed with this fact in mind: Entrepreneurs often produce nancial
plans that are unrealistic or incomplete. A lack of realism sometimes
results from the entrepreneur’s upbeat, optimistic attitude toward the
business idea and his or her skills. Entrepreneurs tend to have
above-average confidence in their own abilities and insights, and so
they naturally become excited about the opportunities they have
uncovered. Thus, unrealistic financial plans partly reflect an honest
difference of perception between an entrepreneur and unbiased

observers. They also may reflect entrepreneurs’ failure to

understand the competitive requirements or conditions of the

market and industry they intend to enter.

Experienced readers will research these requirements and

conditions, using public information as well as their own sources and
judgment, with particular attention to financial assumptions or results
that depart from industry norms.

Keep in mind the fol owing truth: A new company almost never matches,
let alone surpasses, the operational e ciency and materials costs of
successful incumbents in its industry. A financial plan that shows your
company enjoying higher gross margins (lower costs of goods

sold), lower costs of raw materials or manufactured components, or any
other operating advantage over incumbent firms will cause

skepticism among your readers. At the very least, they will want to know
exactly why and how your company will be able to achieve

these advantages even as it is learning its way in the industry. Only a
fundamentally different way of organizing or carrying out

operations has a chance to convince your readers, and even then they
will see great risks in your proposed innovation.

Unrealistic or incomplete financial plans also result from

entrepreneurs’ lack of financial and accounting skills. Most

entrepreneurs count on their knowledge of a market, personal

contacts or selling abilities, technical acumen, or novel idea; they are
not often experts in finance or accounting. You should

honestly assess your competence in the latter subjects and, if there is
any doubt in your mind, hire a professional to assist in

preparing your financial plan.

Another fact to be aware of: Even reasonable nancial plans may meet with
doubt among readers if you fail to explain the assumptions that underlie
them. Merely generating detailed, monthly financial projections running
years into the future will not impress readers: They use spreadsheets,
too, and know that a computer’s output is only as good as its input data
and assumptions. Entrepreneurs

frequently project robust growth rates in sales, stable or declining
unit costs of production, or other optimistic trends that yield
impressive results when plugged into a spreadsheet program.

Without solid evidence or compelling arguments for the

assumptions you built into the financial plan, experienced readers will
discount your results and, in all likelihood, reduce their regard for
your qualifications to lead the venture. You will have lost ground in
both objectives of convincing them.

Pro Forma Financial Statements

The financial plan should present the following information:

The sources and uses of funds received from investors and lenders Pro
forma (formal, conventional) statements of sales and income, cash flow,
balance sheets

Expected returns to investors and coverage of any debt obligations
Follow these guides, presenting the pro forma statements in two ways to
satisfy readers’ different needs.

Prepare summaries of yearly results or balances to provide quick access
to your nancial plans for al readers. These summaries will be sufficient
for some. Readers will expect at least three years of statements and may
want more.

Also, prepare monthly statements of the same accounts. This periodic
reporting satisfies other readers’ need for greater detail, especially
with respect to the first two years of operation. Their desire for
monthly data stems from the danger that a young company will run out of
cash during its slow season or while gearing for rapid

growth, and consequently fail for insolvency before it can achieve the
satisfactory results projected for the longer period. Your

financial plan should guard against this possibility, for your sake as

well as your investors’ or lenders’. (See Figure 2.2j, pp. 159–62.)

Proposed Deal Structure

In one sense, the business plan has been building to this portion of the
financial plan ever since its first page. Even after demonstrating the
existence and extent of an unmet need, the practicality of pursuing this
opportunity with your particular strategy, and the lucrative returns
that await the venture, you as the entrepreneur must attract the
necessary backing. One part of this effort is convincing readers that
you are the right person to launch the venture. Another key to
persuading readers to support the venture is offering an acceptable
deal.

Follow these guides for describing your proposed deal structure.

Describe the deal in terms of its bene ts to the readers who would
provide the capital. Remember, the business plan is primarily a sales
document. You are asking them to bear some of the venture’s

financial risk, and in return you must offer payoffs that induce them to
accept your proposition. The venture’s profitability will mean nothing
to its investors unless they share in the rewards:

Ο How you structure the financial deal will determine how the

rewards are divided.

Ο The exit strategy you propose for these investors will tell how and
when they may expect to receive their rewards.

Both parts of the deal—the division of rewards and the method

and timing of their realization—must appeal to investors. (See

Figure 2.2k, pp. 163 and 164.)

State clearly what you o er and the price you ask.

Ο For equity investors, your proposition is to sell them a

proportional stake in the company, represented by ownership of

its stock.

Ο For lenders, your proposition is to borrow funds for a certain period
in return for their repayment with interest according to a specific
schedule.

Include concise summary tables of the proposed capital structure,
because the pro forma financial statements will not spell out the terms
in sufficient detail to satisfy potential investors or lenders.

Show the several categories of investors and the amounts they

contribute in return for their shares of the company, as illustrated by
the KidSmartTM plan (Figure 2.2i, Exhibit 12-B, p. 158).

A similar distinction is needed among different types of lenders if the
proposed capital structure includes debt.

Lay out a plan for converting professional investors’ investments into
cash.

Professional investors differ in how long they prefer to own the shares
of companies they back. Because many such investors

specialize in identifying promising young companies rather than in
holding a portfolio of established companies, they will want to sell
their stock within a few years of investing in your company.

For these investors the exit strategy is a crucial consideration: Are
you asking them simply to trust that the company’s strong

performance and rosy prospects will ensure a market for its stock?

Or have you laid out a plan for converting their investment into cash?
Professional investors will insist on the latter and will expect a
credible scenario for bringing it about. Possible exit strategies may
include the following:

Ο the sale of their stock during a subsequent offering of shares to the
public, or

Ο the sale of the entire company to a larger, established company.

The exit strategy should mesh logically with the venture strategy and
discussion of the company’s future development that you

have included in earlier sections.

Body: Risks, Contingencies, and Future Development

Any experienced business manager or investor (or military officer, or
airline passenger) has learned that few projects (or campaigns, or
vacation itineraries) work out exactly as planned. Simple or routine
operations may offer a few surprises, but with complexity or novelty
come complications and unanticipated changes. Earlier in this chapter
you learned why business plans are helpful even though they will not
remain unchanged throughout their implementation. Now you will learn
about how to deal with the reality of changed conditions.

Readers of the business plan will have their own doubts about its
assumptions or about how smoothly you will be able to implement it.
Those doubts can prove fatal to your arguments to convince them of the
plan’s validity and your qualifications to execute it and to persuade
them to support your efforts. On the other hand, you can neutralize the
doubts or even turn them to your advantage if you:

Recognize risks your venture will encounter.

Spell out the contingent (that is, conditional or standby) plans for
dealing with those risks should they materialize.

Lay out further plans for the company’s development beyond the

stage covered in detail by the business plan.

Risks and Contingencies

Readers will look for evidence of your understanding of the venture
strategy and the conditions the company will face. Your ability to
distinguish between important and trivial risks will be taken as
evidence of your readiness to launch and manage the venture, as will
your insightful and specific explanation of those risks. Readers will
look for similar evidence in

your contingent plans for limiting or offsetting their impact. If you
define and explain the risks in specific terms, your plan for dealing
with each risk can be presented in a paragraph or two. This section is
not meant to be an alternative version of your business plan. Instead,
think of each portion as though it were a supplementary “what if”
comment on some key element of your plan. (See Figure 2.2l, p. 165.)

In preparing to discuss risks and contingencies, you must overcome the
temptation to imitate the annual reports or prospectuses of other
companies.

These documents, written to satisfy securities regulations and legal
precedents, contain much boilerplate (standardized) language on business
risks that, taken literally, would discourage most investors from owning
the companies’ stock. Virtually anything that could go wrong is
presented as a possibility, sometimes softened by a statement that
management believes the problem can be overcome. Remember that the
objective of the annual report or prospectus increasingly is to avoid
lawsuits alleging that management misled stockholders, and that those
documents never were intended as candid treatments of a company’s
strategy or the steps that might counter the associated risks and
problems. (You may want to protect yourself by including an investor’s
disclaimer as described under Producing and Presenting the Business
Plan.)

Future Development

Readers will want to know about your venture’s prospects after it
accomplishes the strategy and objectives laid out in the business plan.

Whether you choose to present this information as part of the “risks and
contingencies” component or as a separate component will depend on its
ability to stand alone. If your ideas for future development involve new
products or some other significant departure from the original plan’s
strategy, present this material as its own major section of the main
body.

These guides may prove helpful in writing the future development section
of your plan.

Explain what milestones or conditions would trigger this new phase of
your company’s development. Otherwise readers may suspect that you have
not settled on a primary strategy and are proposing alternatives to be
trotted out whenever troubles arise.

Describe the opportunities you have in mind, giving basic information on
their size or the evidence of their existence. (See Figure 2.2m,

pp. 166 and 167.) Note: You should not attempt to project market or
financial results of the future possibilities, as they are too

speculative at present.

Avoid giving the impression that this next phase would be a clean break
from the strategy and activities that went before. Otherwise, readers
will suspect that it would pose the same risks and uncertainties as

starting from scratch while giving up the advantage of early risk-taking
and achievement. Your discussion of the company’s future development
should build on the success of your venture to exploit opportunities it
will create.

Appendices

As noted in Chapter 1, a lengthy or complex report (such as a research
report or business plan) is likely to include a set of appendices (the
plural) rather than just one appendix. The distinction emphasizes that
each appendix stands on its own, has its own title and number, and
appears on a numbered page so the reader may find it without wading
through all the others. Note: KidSmart’s business plan in Figure 2.2
does not include appendices.

Keep these guides in mind when preparing the appendices for your
business plan.

Include a reference to each appendix in the business plan’s main body at
the rst point where its material is relevant, and possibly at subsequent
points where it also applies. Otherwise the reader will never know that
the appendix exists or where to find it, and the persuasive power of the
appendix will be lost.

Place supplementary material in appendices. Their contents should deepen
the reader’s understanding of your business concept and

plan or elaborate on information included in the main body.

Appendices often contain the following items:

Ο résumés of the company’s managers or directors

Ο letters of reference from business associates or satisfied

customers

Ο photos of the company’s facilities

Ο press coverage of the company or its founders

Ο published research

Do NOT use appendices to present charts, graphs, or tables that depict
data or concepts you present in the body, or to provide photographs that
are keys to understanding your product or service. The reader does not
want to flip back and forth between the body and the appendices while
trying to understand your argument. Place such materials in the body,
either separately, as in Exhibits 2 and 3, pp. 137 and 139, or sharing a
page with text, as in Exhibits 1 and 4, pp. 135 and 140.

Producing and Presenting the Business Plan

From your previous report-writing experience, you are likely aware of
these guides, which also apply to writing a business plan.

Work with an outline to organize your thoughts.

Use notes to prepare your arguments and supporting material.

Write drafts of sections and later tie them together.

Ask knowledgeable associates to criticize the drafts.

Revise your work through multiple drafts; then proofread and edit.

Your aim is to win the readers’ support by demonstrating the
attractiveness of your business concept and strategy as well as your own
fitness to lead the venture, and halfway measures are not good enough.

Two more important guides for business plans deserve special emphasis.

Do not use any of the widely distributed, inexpensive business plan
templates to create your plan. Some entrepreneurs are tempted to avoid
the hard work of writing their business plan. Vendors of template
software promise the ease of fill-in-the-blanks to produce your business
plan. In completing the software’s sentences they exercise little
imagination and express little innovative potential, leading to
diminished interest from readers.

Engage someone to coach you if you need help in organizing and polishing
your business plan. Look for a coach rather than a consultant: someone
who will share expertise and experience and make

suggestions—but NOT write the business plan for you. When

presenting the plan to potential investors later, you must be

thoroughly familiar with every aspect of the written plan in order to

answer the penetrating questions they will ask.7

Producing the Business Plan

Throughout this chapter you have learned about the contents of a
business plan and how to argue effectively for your venture and your
leadership of it.

Now we turn to the business plan’s physical appearance. You will need to
accomplish a balancing act to make it look professional without being
too slick.8 To achieve the desired appearance and thereby create the
desired impression of your business plan, consider the guides in Figure
2.3.

[]

Figure 2.3 Business plan production guides

Presenting the Plan to Investors and Others

Exercise care and selectivity in distributing your business plan by
using the following guides.

Take time to learn a venture capitalist or other investor’s interests
before submitting your plan, and send it only to those whose stated
investment interests appear to include your type of venture. (Many
directories of venture capital or angel investor groups state each
group’s investment criteria by industry, technology, company size, stage
of development, geography, and so forth.) Professional

investors are a networked community, as are many local investors, and
your indiscriminate distribution of a business plan may give you an
unwanted reputation among them. Besides, it unproductively circulates
more copies of your plan, needlessly increasing the risk of lost
confidentiality.

If you send a cold (unsolicited) copy of the business plan, include an
investor disclaimer. This statement is the business plan’s equivalent to
the boilerplate warnings found in prospectuses, although it is less
exhaustive or specific. (Such protective language would appear in later
documents presented during negotiations with interested

investors.) A standard disclaimer prepared by the advisor to

KidSmart appears in Figure 2.4.

[]

Figure 2.4 Standard investors’ disclaimer

The KidSmart team’s faculty advisor authored an epilogue on the KidSmart
business plan and the team’s experiences in business plan competitions,
shown in Figure 2.5.

[]

Figure 2.5 Epilogue on the KidSmart business plan

Summary

A business plan describes in detail an entrepreneur’s business concept
and the resources needed to launch a venture to realize it. The plan
also presents the expected financial results and proposes a deal to
prospective backers. In writing a business plan, the entrepreneur has
two purposes: (1) convincing readers that the business concept is viable
under his or her leadership and (2) persuading them to provide the
desired support. A business plan is usually required to obtain outside
funding but is useful even to the entrepreneur who seeks no investors.

Throughout the business plan, the entrepreneur must present not only
information but also the arguments to convince and persuade readers.

Though there is no template that all business plans must fit, most
successful plans include the components on this checklist.

 □ Cover page

Along with the company name, included every type of contact

information available, including the name of a contact person.

Showed the business plan’s completion date and the copy number

for tracking copies you distribute.

Ideally, displayed a professionally designed company logo.

Added a statement of your ownership of the business plan that

prohibits copying all or part of it for any reason.

 □ Table of contents

Included only section (Level 1) headings and the starting page

number of each.

Listed all appendices, identified by label and title and, of course,
page number.

Inserted a page tab at the beginning of each section to help readers
skip from place to place easily.

 □ Executive summary

Wrote this component after all other parts were complete.

Did not copy wording used in the body into the executive summary.

Wrote it from scratch.

Limited the summary to two pages, selecting vital points and

omitting minor details.

 □ Discussion of the business concept and product or service

Provided specific information about (1) your company’s product or
service in terms of the customer needs it will fill, (2) types of
customers on which your business will focus, (3) benefits customers will
receive from using your product or service, and (4) how the product or
service will be distributed.

Described your company’s key customers. How do they differ from other
buyers of your product or service?

Stated what sets your business apart from its competitors.

 □ Discussion of the industry, market, and competitors

Indicated the size of the industry, its stage of development, and its
growth potential.

Described the industry’s geographic concentration (if any) and the
patterns of difference between regions. Provided data to support your
assertions.

Analyzed and discussed the competitive forces your business will face,
using Porter’s Five Forces model. Emphasized the industry’s

profit potential and discussed prevalent gross margins in the industry.

 □ Discussion of the venture strategy and plans for marketing,

operations, and management

In the marketing plan, discussed the distribution channels and sales
methods to be used, the advertising and promotions targeting each
channel, and the final buyers of your product or service.

In the operations plan, described your manufacturing process (if your
company manufactures a product) or your organizational

process (if your business performs a service).

 □ Financial plan and proposed deal structure, including an exit
strategy for investors

Ensured a plan that is realistic and complete.

Always explained the assumptions that underlie your financial plan.

Among your pro forma financial statements, included summaries of annual
results, covering at least three years.

Prepared monthly statements to show more details.

When describing your proposed deal structure, focused on its

benefits to the investors in your business. Stated exactly what you
offer the investors and precisely what you are asking of them.

Set forth a clear plan for converting investments to cash.

 □ Discussion of risks, contingencies, and future development of the
company

Identifed the risks your business will face, differentiating between
major risks and minor ones.

Devised a contingent plan to control or balance the impact of each major
risk you identify; then, the minor ones.

Described opportunities for future development in your business and what
conditions will activate that next phase. Provided

evidence that the opportunities exist.

Showed how these new developments will be a natural extension of your
venture’s success, not a new beginning.

 □ Appendices containing supporting materials

Included related, but nonessential information. Visuals essential to
understanding your business concept belong in the body.

Called attention to each appendix by its label at an appropriate place
in the body of your business plan.

Produce and present the report with the same great care used in creating
your business plan. Use this checklist to aid your business plan’s
effectiveness.

 □ Used a size 12 serif font, block paragraphs, single (multiple)
spacing, and margins of at least 1 in. all around (after binding). Used
a larger, bold font for headings.

 □ Revised and edited your draft meticulously.

 □ Limited to 25 pages and numbered each page (did not print a

number on the cover).

 □ Marked each section with an index tab and used a simple binding that
allows the report to lie flat.

 □ Distributed your plan only to investors interested in ventures like
yours. Included an investors disclaimer, especially if you distribute an

unsolicited business plan.

 □ Became ultra familiar with the details of your business plan before
meeting with investors.

To create your business plan, follow the guides and KidSmart examples in
this chapter. Then, in collaboration with associates and, ideally, with
the guidance of a coach, use sound judgment to design a plan for your
unique situation.

* This business plan was a global champion in the prestigious MOOTCORP
Competition of the McCombs School of Business at the University of Texas
at Austin, dubbed by Business Week “the Super Bowl of world
business-plan competition.” (The cover page illustration [Figure 2.1a]
contains some fictitious data and is NOT KidSmart’s original cover.)

APPENDIX A

Business Data Sources on the Web

and in Libraries

Data sources on the web fall into four categories (with some overlap
among them):

Business and industry directories

Digital libraries

Country profiles

Online databases

In each category, a few websites will likely become your go-to sources,
saved in your browser’s bookmarks or favorites. In the directories
category, for example, you may find yourself going to these sources
repeatedly.

Corporate Affiliations

(http://corporateaffiliations.com/default/index?id=routetohome) Kompass
(http://us.kompass.com)

The Public Register Online (www.annualreportservice.com)

ThomasNet (www.thomasnet.com)

Digital libraries may contain books, as well as journals and magazines
and other publishing media. Keep these library websites at the ready.

BPubs (www.bpubs.com)

FindArticles.com (www.findarticles.com) HighBeam Research
(www.highbeam.com)

International business information will be indispensable to your career.

Top online sources for global business data include these websites.

CIA World Factbook (www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-

factbook)

International Data Base

(www.census.gov/population/international/data/idb/informationGate

way.php)

World DataBank (http://databank.worldbank.org/data/home.aspx) Among the
numerous online databases, you will likely identify several that you go
to often. Predictably your favorites will include one of more sites on
this short list.

Bankrate.com (www.bankrate.com) Catalog of U.S. Government Publications

(https://catalog.gpo.gov/F?RN=319705784)

EDGAR Online (www.edgar-online.com) GPO ECONI (economic indicators from
Government. Publishing

Office) (www.gpo.gov/fdsys/browse/collection.action?

collectionCode=ECONI)

Hoovers (www.hoovers.com)

Mergent OnlineTM (www.mergentonline.com/login.php) For locating
secondary sources, academic, corporate, and public libraries offer
advantages not available on the web. For example, proprietary databases
in libraries provide uncommon flexibility for expanding or narrowing
searches. Unlike web content, essentially all library content has been
evaluated for accuracy of facts and expertise of authors. Also, library
references are constant over months, years, even decades, while websites
come and go.

The following list includes widely used proprietary databases.

Business Source Complete

CultureGrams

IBISWorld

LexisNexis Academic

Passport

ProQuest

Some classic business references continue to be published in book form
only. Among them are the following data-rich sources.

Craighead’s International Business …

Mil ion Dol ar Directory

Hoover’s Handbook of World Business

Political Risk Yearbook

Standard and Poor’s Register …

A publication titled Business Periodicals Index is an invaluable tool
for locating secondary sources in a library. It is organized by author
name, subject, and article title. Whether a printed or digital version
of the Index, it will give you the details—article title, journal or
magazine title, even the page number or numbers—for tracking down the
articles you decide to read.

For thorough coverage of collecting secondary business data,
see-Clippinger’s Business Research Reporting.1

Notes

Chapter 1

1. Clippinger (2016, pp. 103–04).

2. Clippinger (2016, pp. 105–06).

3. Clippinger (2016, pp. 107–10).

4. Clippinger (2019, pp. 122–29).

5. Clippinger (2017, pp. 43–47, 136–37).

6. McMurrey (n.d.).

7. Clippinger (2017, pp. 82–86, 90–93).

8. Clippinger (2018, pp. 125–30).

9. American Psychological Association (2010).

10. Clippinger (2018, pp. 131–36).

11. American Psychological Association (2010, pp. 174–79).

12. Clippinger (2018, pp. 153–58).

13. American Psychological Association (2010, p. 180).

14. Modern Language Association of America (2009, pp. 129–35).

15. American Psychological Association (2010, pp. 184–87).

16. Singhal and Anil (2015, p. 1).

17. Balliett (2011); Office of National Statistics (n.d.); Yau (2011).

18. American Psychological Association (2010, p. 101).

19. Shwom and Snyder (2014, p. 328).

20. Shwom and Snyder (2014, p. 359).

21. Shwom and Snyder (2014, pp. 360 and 361).

22. Shwom and Snyder (2014, pp. 359 and 360).

23. McMahon (2014).

24. Kyrnin (2017a); Kyrnin (2017b).

25. World Wide Web Consortium Schools for Web Design (n.d.).

26. World Wide Web Consortium Schools for Web Design (n.d.).

27. Guglieri (2015); Alred, Brusaw, and Oliu (2009); and World Wide Web
Consortium Schools for Web Design (n.d.).

28. World Wide Web Consortium Schools for Web Design (n.d.); Alred,
Brusaw, and Oliu (2009); and World Wide Web Consortium (n.d.).

29. World Wide Web Consortium Schools for Web Design (n.d.).

30. “Paper Products Manufacturing Market Global Briefing” (2018).

31. “Will Post-Brexit Britain Hinder a Robo-Revolution?” (2017).

32. Cebr (2017).

Chapter 2

1. Martens, Jennings, and Jennings (2007).

2. Sandberg, Schweiger, and Hofer (1988).

3. Allen (2006).

4. Rouse (n.d.).

5. Porter (1980). Besides this original source, numerous textbooks in
strategic management and entrepreneurship summarize Porter’s model and
techniques.

6. Allen (2006, p. 194).

7. Berry (2014).

8. Allen (2006, p. 195).

Appendix A

1. Clippinger (2018, pp. 119–21).

References

Allen, K.R. 2006. Launching New Ventures: An Entrepreneurial Approach,
4th ed. Chapter 4. Mason, OH: Cengage Learning.

Alred, G.J., C.T. Brusaw, and W.E. Oliu. 2009. Handbook of Technical
Writing, 9th ed. New York, NY: St. Martin’s Press.

American Psychological Association. 2010. Publication Manual of the
American Psychological Association, 6th ed. Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association.

Anders, A. 2016. “Team Communication Platforms and Emergent Social
Collaboration Practices.”

International Journal of Business Communication, 53(2), 224-261.

Balliett, A. 2011. “The Do’s and Don’ts of Infographic Design.” Smashing
Magazine.

www.smashingmagazine.com/2011/the-dos-and-donts-of-info graphic-design

Berry, T. 2014. “True Story: Why You Don’t Want a Business Plan Writer.”
SBA (U.S. Small

Business Administration).
https://sba.gov/blogs/true-story-why-you-dont-want-business-plan-

writer

CEBR (Centre for Economics and Business Research). 2017. “The Impact of
Automation: A Report

for

Redwood.”

https://cebr.com/reports/new-study-shows-u-s-is-world-leader-in-robotics-

automation/

Centre for Economics and Business Research. 2017. “Will Post-Brexit
Britain Hinder a Robo-

Revolution? Research from Redwood Software and Cebr.”
https://cebr.com/reports/new-study-

shows-u-s-is-world-leader-in-robotics-automation/

Clippinger, D. 2016. Planning and Organizing Business Reports: Written,
Oral, and Research-Based. New York, NY: Business Expert Press.

Clippinger, D. 2017. Producing Written and Oral Business Reports:
Formatting, Il ustrating, and Presenting.

New York, NY: Business Expert Press.

Clippinger, D. 2018. Business Research Reporting. New York, NY: Business
Expert Press.

Clippinger, D. 2019. Business Report Guides: Routine and Nonroutine
Reports and Policies, Procedures, and Instructions. New York, NY:
Business Expert Press.

“EBIDTA.  n.d.” Bing Search.
https://bing.com/search?q=ebitda+definition&qs=HS&sc=8-

0&cvid=5DD29B5497E041348BF8068C8BBC97D2&FORM=QBLH&sp=1 (accessed June
18,

2018).

Guglieri, C. 2015. “20 Steps to the Perfect Website Layout.” Creative
Blog.

www.creativebloq.com/web-design/steps-perfect-website-layout-812625

Henry, S.L., and L. McGee, eds. n.d. “World Wide Web Consortium.” W3C.

www.w3.org/standards/webdesign/accessibility (accessed February 27,
2018).

“Internal Rate of Return—IRR. n.d.” Investopedia.
https://investopedia.com/terms/i/irr.asp (accessed June 18, 2018).

Kuiper, S., and D. Clippinger. 2013. Contemporary Business Reports, 5th
edition. Mason, OH: Cengage Learning.

Kyrnin, J. 2017a. “Best Practices for Using PDFs on Web Pages.” About
Tech.

webdesign.about.com/od/pdf/a/pdfs_and_web_design_best_practices.htm
(accessed February 10, 2018).

Kyrnin, J. 2017b. “How to Add a PDF Document to a Website.” About Tech.

www.webdesign.about.com/cs/beginninghtml/ht/htaddpdffile.htm

Martens, M.L., J.E. Jennings, and P.D. Jennings. 2007. “Do the Stories
They Tell Get Them the Money They Need? The Role of Entrepreneurial
Narratives in Resource Acquisition.” Academy of Management Journal 50,
no. 5, pp. 1107–32, 1108.

McMahon, F. 2014. “Quit Decking Around: 7 Ways to Use PowerPoint.” Make
a Powerful Point.

www.makeapowerfulpoint.com/2014/05/28/stop-decking-around-7-ways-use-powerpoint

McMurrey, D. n.d. “Parallelism.” Common Grammar, Usage, and Spelling
Problems.

https://prismnet.com/~hcexres/textbook/gram2.html#paral

Office

of

National

Statistics.

n.d.

“Infographic

Guidelines.”

http://theidpblog.files.wordpress.com/2013/10/infographic-guidelines-v1-0.pdf
(accessed February 21, 2018).

“Paper Products Manufacturing Market Global Briefing. 2018.”

e Business Research Company.

https://thebusinessresearchcompany.com

Porter, M.E. 1980. Competitive Strategy. New York, NY: Free Press.

“Price-to-Earnings Ratio (P/E). n.d.” Investing Answers.
www.investinganswers.com/financial-

dictionary/ratio-analysis/price-earnings-ratio-pe-459 (accessed June 18,
2018).

Rouse,

M.

n.d.

“Pilot

Program

(pilot

study).”

TechTarget.

https://searchcio.techtarget.com/definition/pilot-program-pilot-study
(accessed May 16, 2018).

Sandberg, W.R., D.M. Schweiger, and C.W. Hofer. Winter 1988. “The Use of
Verbal Protocols in Determining Venture Capitalists’ Decision
Processes.” Entrepreneurship eory and Practice 13, no.

2, pp. 7–20.

Shwom, B., and L.G. Snyder. 2014. Business Communication: Polishing Your
Professional Presence, 2nd ed. Boston, MA: Pearson.

Singhal, N., and A. Anil. 2015. “Infographics: The Artistic Way to
Convey Information into Knowledge.” e International Journal of Science &
Technoledge 3, no. 2, p. 100. ProQuest database.

The Modern Language Association of America. 2009. MLA Handbook for
Writers of Research Papers, 7th ed. New York, NY: The Modern Language
Association of America.

World

Wide

Web

Consortium

Schools

for

Web

Design.

n.d.

W3Schools.

www.w3schools.com/website/web_design.asp (accessed February 26, 2018).

Yau, N. 2011. Visualize

is:

e Flowing Data Guide to Design, Visualization, and Statistics.

Indianapolis, IN: Wiley Publishing, Inc.

About the Author

Dr. Dorinda Clippinger earned business education degrees from
Shippensburg University of Pennsylvania and Indiana
University-Bloomington; taught information management in Western
Kentucky University’s College of Business Administration; and managed
titles and content development teams at South-Western Publishing Co.
before founding Penworthy Learning Systems, a consultancy for
instructional materials publishers. As a Lecturer in Management, Darla
Moore School of Business (University of South Carolina) for 11 years,
she taught-professional communication, including report writing and
presentation. For 18 years, she has participated in the Association for
Business Communication. Dr. Clippinger coauthored with Dr. Shirley
Kuiper the 5th edition of Contemporary Business Reports. More recently
she authored Planning and Organizing Business Reports (2016), Producing
Written and Oral Business Reports (2017), Business Research Reporting
(2018), and Business Report Guides: Routine, and Nonroutine Reports and
Policies, Procedures, and Instructions (2019) for Business Expert Press.

Index

Acceptance message, 16–17

Acknowledgments, 19–20

Alternative presentations

combination, 79

online format, 75–78

report deck format, 72–75

Appendix, 33, 128–129

Authorization message, 16–17

Binder, 14

Blank page, 67

Business concept, 105–107, 134

Business data sources, 177–179

Business plan

appendices, 128–129

concept and product, 104–109

de nition of, 95

nancial plan, 120–125, 157–158

industry and the market, 109–114, 141

preliminary components, 100–104

producing and presenting,

168–172

reasons for writing, 98–99

risks, contingencies, and future development, 120–125, 165–167

special chal enges of, 96–97

venture strategy and plans, 115–120, 144–146

Combination method, 79

Conclusions, 29–30

Contents, 18, 37

Cost advantage, 115–116

Cover, 14

Cover page, 100–102, 130

Data col ection

description of, 5–6

needs and sources, 6, 7

primary versus secondary, 6–8

Deductive structure

introduction of report in, 65, 66

report body, 64

Di erentiation, 115–116

Discuss il ustration, 25

Display graphics, 25

Entrepreneurs, 96–99

Executive summary, 20, 39

business plan, 103–104, 132–133

in visual form, 59, 62–64

Financial plan, 120–125, 157–158

Findings, 22–24, 44–50

Flyleaf, 14–15

Formal research report parts

overview of, 12–14

report body, 20–32

report preliminaries, 14–20

report supplements, 32–58

Format guides

for prelims, 66–68

for report body, 68–71

Formatting manuscript, 8, 12

Glossary, 33, 53

Headings Aid discussion of ndings, 22

Headings format, 68–70

HTML tags, 76–78

Il ustrations, 25, 38

Index, 33

Industry and market, 109–114, 141

Insert report cover, 67

Interview guide, 54–55

Introduction, 21, 40–43

Library, business data sources, 177–179

List of il ustrations, 38

Management plan, 118–120, 155–156

Manuscript, formatting, 8, 12

Margins and spacing, 68

Market explanation, 142–143

Marketing plan, 116–117, 147–152

Nonspeci c headings, 22

Nontraditional title page, 59, 60

Number preliminary pages, 66–67

Online format, 75–78

Operational plan, 117–118, 153–154

Page numbering, 70

Planning research

12-part, 1–3

data col ection, 5–8

de ning problem, 4

scope analysis, 4–5

Portable document format (PDF) le, 75–76

Preface, 18–19

Primary data, 6–8

Product explanation, 107–109, 135–140

Pro le of the participants, 57–58

Pro forma nancial statements, 123, 159–162

Proposed deal structure, 124–125

Recommendations, 29–30, 51

References, 30–32, 52

format guides for, 70–71

Report body, 20–32

conclusions and recommendations, 29–30, 51

in deductive structure, 64

description of, 20–21

discuss the il ustration, 25

display the graphic, 25

ndings, 22–24, 44–50

format guides, 68–71

introduce the visual, 24

introduction, 21

references, 30–32, 52

report summary, 28

source citations aid credibility, 26–28

Report cover, 67

Report deck format, 72–75

Report preliminaries, 14–20

acceptance message, 16–17

acknowledgments, 19–20

authorization message, 16–17

contents, 18, 37

cover/binder, 14

executive summary, 20, 39

yleaves, 14–15

preface, 18–19

title page, 15–16

transmittal message, 16

Report summary, 28

Report supplements, 32–58

appendix, 33

glossary, 33, 53

index, 33

Research proposal, 9–11

Risks and contingencies, 126–127, 165

Secondary data, 6–8

Separate transmittal message, 59, 61

Source citations aid credibility, 26–28

Speci c headings, 22

Summary, 79–93

Table of contents, 37, 68, 102–103, 131

Title page, 15–16

Transmittal letter, 36

Transmittal message, 16

Varying report parts

executive summary in visual form, 59, 62–64

nontraditional title page, 59, 60

separate transmittal message, 59, 61

Venture strategy and plans, 115–120, 144–146

di erentiation or cost advantage, 115–116

management plan, 118–120

marketing plan, 116–117

operational plan, 117–118

Visitor’s checklist, 56

Visuals clarify and simplify ndings, 23–24

Web, business data sources, 177–179

OTHER TITLES IN OUR CORPORATE COMMUNICATION

COLLECTION

Debbie DuFrene, Stephen F. Austin State University, Editor

• Producing Written and Oral Business Reports: Formatting, Illustrating,
and Presenting by Dorinda Clippinger

• Essential Communications Skills for Managers, Volume I: A Practical
Guide for Communicating Effectively with All People in All Situations by
Walter St. John and Ben Haskell

• Essential Communications Skills for Managers, Volume II: A Practical
Guide for Communicating Effectively with All People in All Situations by
Walter St. John and Ben Haskell

• How to Write Brilliant Business Blogs: The Skills and Techniques You
Need, Volume I by Suzan St Maur

• How to Write Brilliant Business Blogs: What to Write About, Volume II
by Suzan St Maur

• English Business Jargon and Slang: How to Use It and What It Really
Means by Suzan St Maur

Announcing the Business Expert Press Digital

Library

Concise e-books business students need for classroom and research This
book can also be purchased in an e-book collection by your library as

• a one-time purchase,

• that is owned forever,

• allows for simultaneous readers,

• has no restrictions on printing, and

• can be downloaded as PDFs from within the library community.

Our digital library collections are a great solution to beat the rising
cost of textbooks. E-books can be loaded into their course management
systems or onto students’ e-book readers.

The Business Expert Press digital libraries are very affordable, with no

obligation to buy in future years. For more information, please visit

www.businessexpertpress.com/librarians. To set up a trial in the United
States, please email sales@businessexpertpress.com.

[]

[]

Document Outline

- Preface
- Acknowledgments
- Chapter 1 Writing Business Research Reports
- Chapter 2 Writing Business Plans
- Appendix A: Business Data Sources on the Web and in Libraries
- Notes
- References
- About the Author
- Index
