[]

[cover.eps]

OceanofPDF.com

[Title Page Image]

White Papers For Dummies®

Published by
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
111 River St.
Hoboken, NJ 07030-5774
www.wiley.com

Copyright © 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey

Published simultaneously in Canada

No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning or otherwise, except as
permitted under Sections 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright
Act, without the prior written permission of the Publisher. Requests to
the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Permissions
Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ
07030, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at
http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.

Trademarks: Wiley, the Wiley logo, For Dummies, the Dummies Man logo, A
Reference for the Rest of Us!, The Dummies Way, Dummies Daily, The Fun
and Easy Way, Dummies.com, Making Everything Easier, and related trade
dress are trademarks or registered trademarks of John Wiley & Sons,
Inc., and/or its affiliates in the United States and other countries,
and may not be used without written permission. All other trademarks are
the property of their respective owners. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., is not
associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book.

Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: The publisher and the author
make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or
completeness of the contents of this work and specifically disclaim all
warranties, including without limitation warranties of fitness for a
particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales or
promotional materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may
not be suitable for every situation. This work is sold with the
understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering legal,
accounting, or other professional services. If professional assistance
is required, the services of a competent professional person should be
sought. Neither the publisher nor the author shall be liable for damages
arising herefrom. The fact that an organization or Website is referred
to in this work as a citation and/or a potential source of further
information does not mean that the author or the publisher endorses the
information the organization or Website may provide or recommendations
it may make. Further, readers should be aware that Internet Websites
listed in this work may have changed or disappeared between when this
work was written and when it is read.

For general information on our other products and services, please
contact our Customer Care Department within the U.S. at 877-762-2974,
outside the U.S. at 317-572-3993, or fax 317-572-4002.

For technical support, please visit www.wiley.com/techsupport.

Wiley publishes in a variety of print and electronic formats and by
print-on-demand. Some material included with standard print versions of
this book may not be included in e-books or in print-on-demand. If this
book refers to media such as a CD or DVD that is not included in the
version you purchased, you may download this material at
http://booksupport.wiley.com. For more information about Wiley products,
visit www.wiley.com.

Library of Congress Control Number: 2013932119

ISBN 978-1-118-49692-3 (pbk); ISBN 978-1-118-49704-3 (ebk); ISBN
978-1-118-49705-0 (ebk); ISBN 978-1-118-49707-4 (ebk)

Manufactured in the United States of America

10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

About the Author

Gordon Graham is an award-winning writer who has worked on close to 200
white papers for well-known companies, like Google, Rackspace, and
Oracle, plus many smaller firms with big dreams. Gordon wrote his first
white paper in 1997, and by 2001, he decided to specialize in this
unique form of content. His versatile experience as a journalist,
technical writer, marketing executive, and independent copywriter helps
him look at white papers from all different angles: as a reader, a
sponsor, and a creator.

Gordon finds most white papers not nearly as engaging or persuasive as
they could be, and he thinks that’s a shame. He continues to do
research, write articles, and give presentations to professional
marketers and writers on how to make their white papers more effective.
His website, ThatWhitePaperGuy.com, is top-rated in Google, thanks to
the dozens of how-to articles available on his site.

Gordon has taught writing at two universities and given more than 50
workshops, including in-house training at Cisco, Ericsson, and Sprint.
As a freelance journalist, he wrote close to 1,000 magazine articles on
technology for everyone from accountants to woodworkers. And for five
years, he was the editor of SoftwareCEO.com, interviewing dozens of
software executives on the secrets of their success.

Unlike most writers, Gordon has first-hand experience as a marketing
executive. He served as the vice president of marketing for a wireless
startup, where he helped grow sales from $250,000 to $14 million and
then sell the company in three years. He did this, in part, by
sponsoring white papers that helped his firm “eat the lunch” of much
larger competitors.

Gordon lives with his family and two ginger cats a few steps from the
shore of Lake Huron in northern Ontario, Canada. In the summer, he likes
to run, paddle, and cruise the river on his boat, The Thessalon Queen.
In the winter, he is happy to confirm that you can get high-speed
Internet in an igloo.

Dedication

This book is dedicated to my wonderful partner, Angie Gallop, the woman
I dreamed of since I was a teenager. Her love, insight, and sense of
humor are a constant delight to me and all who know her. And to our
daughter, Cassidy Rain, who helps us welcome every day with a toothy
smile and a strong desire to go “oudside.”

Author’s Acknowledgments

It takes a village to write a book, even if only one person’s name is on
the cover. This book took a village of colleagues, creatives, and
clients over the past 15 years to come into being.

Thanks to my fellow white paper writers Michael Stelzner, who blazed the
path with meteoric brilliance, and Jonathan Kantor, with whom I spent
many intriguing hours discussing the past, present, and future of white
papers. Thanks to Manny Gordon for your ongoing wit and wisdom, not to
mention working together on our first-ever white papers, lo these many
years ago. Special thanks to Louise Audren for the design and cover, and
to Britt Brouse, Elizabeth Creith, and Jonathan Kantor for helpful
reviews of the original version of my “ice cream” report. Thanks to Jef
Keep for keeping my website humming along smoothly. Extra-special thanks
to Steve Matthews, who designed the logo and website for That White
Paper Guy and helped set all this in motion. And many thanks to my
brother, Greg Graham, who helped research the global market for white
papers and has been a fine coconspirator in the world of
self-employment.

Thanks to all my colleagues at Wiley, starting with acquisitions editor
Stacy Kennedy, who glimpsed the need for this book; to project editor
Vicki Adang, who coaxed, cajoled, and inspired me with brilliant
suggestions on how to reorganize and refine the manuscript; to technical
editor Russell Willerton, who made many wise suggestions and helped me
remove my foot from my mouth in a few notable places; and to copy editor
Jennette ElNaggar, who made hundreds of eagle-eyed comments on how to
improve the text. And, of course, thank you to my agent Carole Jelen
from Waterside Productions for all your cool-headed advice.

Thanks to my fellow writers, including all the members of To the Point,
the Thessalon Writers’ Group, who inspire me in every possible type of
writing, and to my fellow readers in our book club, who remind me what’s
important in life: friends, laughs, eats, and drinks. To my many friends
in PWAC, you know who you are, especially Anne Douglas, Kathe Lieber,
Paul Lima, Pippa Rispin, Bruce Wilson, and many more. Extra-special
thanks to Steve Slaunwhite for years of encouragement, wise counsel, and
helpful coaching.

Last but certainly not least, thank you to all my clients from Australia
to Finland, who saw the potential of marketing with the unique form of
content called white papers and who weren’t content to publish “just
okay” efforts but urged everyone involved to do our very best. Special
thanks to Ben White and everyone at MJ Impulse for your understanding as
I delayed your white papers to get this book completed. This book
contains the many lessons I learned from working with all of you. And I
trust our learning isn’t over yet.

Publisher’s Acknowledgments

We’re proud of this book; please send us your comments at
http://dummies.custhelp.com. For other comments, please contact our
Customer Care Department within the U.S. at 877-762-2974, outside the
U.S. at 317-572-3993, or fax 317-572-4002.

Some of the people who helped bring this book to market include the
following:

Acquisitions, Editorial, and Vertical Websites

Senior Project Editor: Victoria M. Adang

Acquisitions Editor: Stacy Kennedy

Copy Editor: Jennette ElNaggar

Assistant Editor: David Lutton

Editorial Program Coordinator: Joe Niesen

Technical Editor: Russell Willerton, PhD

Editorial Manager: Michelle Hacker

Editorial Assistants: Rachelle S. Amick, Alexa Koschier

Cover Photo: © John Wiley & Sons

Composition Services

Project Coordinator: Sheree Montgomery

Layout and Graphics: Carrie A. Cesavice, Jennifer Creasey, Joyce Haughey

Proofreaders: Melissa Cossell, Bonnie Mikkelson

Indexer: BIM Indexing & Proofreading Services

Publishing and Editorial for Consumer Dummies

Kathleen Nebenhaus, Vice President and Executive Publisher

David Palmer, Associate Publisher

Kristin Ferguson-Wagstaffe, Product Development Director

Publishing for Technology Dummies

Andy Cummings, Vice President and Publisher

Composition Services

Debbie Stailey, Director of Composition Services

OceanofPDF.com

White Papers For Dummies^(®)

Visit www.dummies.com/cheatsheet/whitepapers to view this book's cheat
sheet.

Table of Contents

Introduction

About This Book

Conventions Used in This Book

What You’re Not to Read

Foolish Assumptions

How This Book Is Organized

Part I: Getting Started with White Papers

Part II: The Three Flavors of White Papers

Part III: From Foggy Idea to Finished Document

Part IV: Succeeding with White Papers

Part V: The Part of Tens

Icons Used in This Book

Where to Go from Here

Part I: Getting Started with White Papers

Chapter 1: Unleashing the Power of White Papers

Seeing a White Paper for What It Is

Getting the scoop on the three flavors of white papers

Following a proven system for creating white papers

Declaring White Papers the “King of Content”

Seeing the growing trend to white papers

Spotting three flaws in many white papers

Using a mantra to avoid problems

Understanding Today’s Complex Sale

B2B marketing has evolved quickly

Today’s B2B buyers do their own research

Profiting from White Papers

At the top of the funnel

Throughout the funnel

At the bottom of the funnel

Discovering Who Uses White Papers and Who Should

Chapter 2: An Exciting Opportunity for Writers

Sizing Up the Possibilities

Looking at three trends pushing white papers to the top

Understanding why marketers can’t find qualified writers

Calculating the earning potential for a white paper writer

Discovering who uses white papers

Wondering whether the white paper opportunity will last

Coming into White Papers from Three Common Paths

Copywriters and white papers

Journalists and white papers

Technical writers and white papers

Finding White Paper Clients

Avoid most of what you hear

Getting started with the basics

The secret of freelance success

Chapter 3: The Past, Present, and Future of White Papers

Where It All Began: Generation 1.0 (1910s to 1990s)

Characteristics of Gen 1.0 white papers

The closest model: Business reports

Forcing White Papers to Evolve

Where White Papers Are Now: Generation 2.0 (1990s to Today)

Characteristics of Gen 2.0 white papers

Two close models: Annual reports and science magazines

But aren’t white papers old-fashioned?

Still evolving, not dying

Where White Papers Are Going: Generation 3.0 (Coming Soon)

Some trends to watch

Four possible paths to the future

Chapter 4: Just the FAQs on White Papers

Working Out the Whats of White Papers

What is a white paper anyway?

What are the industry standards for white papers?

What else do people call white papers?

What’s the difference between white papers and other marketing
materials?

Figuring Out Who Writes and Reads White Papers

Who publishes white papers?

Who reads white papers?

Who hires people to write white papers?

Who writes white papers?

Understanding Why White Papers Are So Useful

Why do companies publish white papers?

Why do prospects read white papers?

Why do writers write white papers?

Pinpointing the Wheres of White Papers

Where do B2B prospects find white papers?

Where do people read white papers?

Where did white papers first come from?

Where are white papers going in the future?

Tracking the Whens of White Papers

When do companies publish white papers?

When do B2B prospects read white papers?

When should a company use each type of white paper?

Figuring Out the Hows of White Papers

How do people read white papers?

How long does a white paper take to create?

How much does a white paper cost?

How much can a writer earn doing white papers?

How can you tell whether a company needs a white paper?

How many white papers are “enough” for a company?

Part II: The Three Flavors of White Papers

Chapter 5: Picking the Perfect Flavor for Your Next White Paper

Recognizing the Three Purposes of White Papers

Defining the Three Flavors: Vanilla, Strawberry, and Chocolate

Zooming in on the product: Plain vanilla

Making points quickly: Scrumptious strawberry

Finding a solution: Rich chocolate

Making two tasty mash-ups

Getting messy with other flavor combinations

Choosing the Right Flavor

Reflecting on your purpose

Considering your target audience

Thinking about your target sector

Choosing between a pure flavor and a mash-up

Figuring out what to do if your idea doesn’t fit any flavor

Developing Your Topic

Sizing up your ideas

Giving readers something new

Getting ideas from prospects and clients

Chapter 6: The Backgrounder: As Basic As Vanilla

Introducing the Granddaddy of All White Papers

Defining a backgrounder

Spotting a backgrounder

Understanding this flavor’s appeal to sales and marketing types

Deciding When to Use a Backgrounder

Promoting an undisputed leader

Supporting a technical evaluation

Supplementing a product launch

Looking at the Pros and Cons of Backgrounders

Pro: Easy to research

Pro: Easy to write

Con: Short-lived

Con: Not good for generating leads

Planning a Backgrounder

Gathering essential information

Allocating pages

Choosing an effective title

Setting a factual tone

Going Beyond Text in a Backgrounder

Adding graphics

Using rich media

Repurposing a Backgrounder

Press release

Slide deck

Demo

Webinar

Chapter 7: The Numbered List: As Fresh As Strawberry

Introducing the Lightest and Liveliest of All White Papers

Defining a numbered list

Spotting a numbered list

Five reasons numbered lists are popular

Deciding When to Use a Numbered List

Getting attention with provocative views

Nurturing prospects already in the funnel

Casting FUD on competitors

Looking at the Pros and Cons of Numbered Lists

Pro: Easiest to write

Pro: Fastest to read

Pro: Easiest to repurpose

Con: Most superficial

Con: Easiest to dismiss

Con: Can be overused

Planning a Numbered List

Gathering essential information

Allocating pages

Choosing an effective title

Setting a provocative tone

Going Beyond Text in a Numbered List

Adding graphics

Using rich media

Repurposing a Numbered List

Blog post

Guest blog

E-newsletter article

Placed article

Chapter 8: The Problem/Solution: As Complex As Chocolate

Introducing the King of Content

Defining a problem/solution

Spotting a problem/solution

Understanding why this flavor appeals to executives

Deciding When to Use a Problem/Solution

Generating leads at the top of the funnel

Educating salespeople and channel partners

Educating analysts, bloggers, and journalists

Redefining a market space

Building mindshare

Looking at Pros and Cons of Problem/Solutions

Pro: Generates the most leads

Pro: Lasts the longest

Pro: Makes the best investment

Con: Hardest to create

Con: Slowest to create

Con: May heighten internal conflicts

Planning a Problem/Solution

Gathering essential information

Allocating pages

Choosing an effective title

Setting a dignified tone

Going Beyond Text in a Problem/Solution

Using graphics in a problem/solution

Using rich media

Repurposing a Problem/Solution

Blog post

Placed article

Slide deck

Webinar

Conference presentation

Chapter 9: Mashing Up Different Flavors

Understanding Why You Need Mash-Ups

Supporting a product launch, plus attracting attention

Generating leads, plus raising your company’s profile

Creating Tasty Mash-Up #1: Backgrounder + Numbered List

When to use this mash-up

What to include and what to leave out

Creating Tasty Mash-Up #2: Problem/Solution + Numbered List

When to use this mash-up

What to include and what to leave out

Avoiding Two Messy Combinations

Messy mash-up #1: Backgrounder + problem/solution

Messy mash-up #2: All three flavors in one

Fixing a Mash-Up That Doesn’t Taste Right

How to tell when you’ve made a mess

Separating the flavors

Reconfirming your purpose

Using the ingredients that belong

Chapter 10: Special Ingredients for a White Paper

Sprinkling on the Special Ingredients

Positioning blurb

Synopsis-style executive summary

Numbered lists

Buyer’s guide

Case studies

Conclusions

Call to action

Leaving Out the Bitter Ingredients

Hype

Marketing speak

Groupthink

Vagueness

Product mentions

Direct attacks on competitors

Part III: From Foggy Idea to Finished Document

Chapter 11: A Proven Process to Complete Your White Paper

Benefitting from a White Paper Process

Not all white paper projects go smoothly

Many companies lack a publishing process

A process you can use for your own

Getting an Overview of the Process

Stage 1: Planning a white paper

Stage 2: Producing a white paper

Stage 3: Promoting a white paper

Getting an Edge with Six Success Factors

Success factor #1: In-house sponsor

Success factor #2: Firm deadline

Success factor #3: Deep understanding of the topic

Success factor #4: Cooperative SMEs and reviewers

Success factor #5: Joint ownership

Success factor #6: Sense of urgency

Taming Four Maddening Pests

The scope-creep

The tug-o-warrior

The no-see-em reviewer

The dyslexic designer

Chapter 12: Planning an Effective White Paper

Step 1: Assembling the Team

What the client does in this step

What the writer does in this step

How to hire a white paper writer

Step 2: Holding a Kickoff Conference Call

What the client does in this step

What the writer does in this step

Resolving differences during the conference call

Step 3: Preparing a Plan

What the writer does in this step

What the client does in this step

Putting together a white paper plan

Step 4: Gathering Research

What the client does in this step

What the writer does in this step

Step 5: Preparing an Executive Summary

What the writer does in this step

What the client does in this step

Crafting the executive summary

Dealing with comments on the executive summary

Chapter 13: Producing a Powerful White Paper

Let the Writer Write!

Step 6: Creating First-Draft Text and Graphics

What the writer does in this step

What the illustrator does in this step

Expanding the executive summary

Creating graphics without an illustrator

Reviewing graphics

Step 7: Gathering Initial Comments

What the client does in this step

Dealing with comments on the first draft

Step 8: Creating the Second-Draft White Paper

What the writer does in this step

What the illustrator does in this step

Step 9: Gathering Final Comments

What the client does in this step

Dealing with comments on the second draft

Step 10: Collecting and Checking Sources

What the writer does in this step

What the client does in this step

Saving source material as PDFs

Keying sources to footnotes

Spot-checking sources

Handling unused sources

Step 11: Preparing the Final Document

What the illustrator does in this step

What the writer does in this step

What the designer does in this step

What the client does in this step

Proofing final pages

Putting keywords in the PDF

Step 12: Wrapping Up the Project

What the client does in this step

What the creatives do in this step

Making payments — the faster, the better

Getting permissions

Transferring copyrights

Doing a postmortem

Part IV: Succeeding with White Papers

Chapter 14: Doing Research: Think Like a Lawyer

Your Goal: Building an Open-and-Shut Case

Digging Up Solid Sources and Extracting Relevant Points

Evaluating sources

Finding sources for a white paper

Understanding what makes good evidence

Keeping Track of a Mountain of Research

Writing out index cards

Typing and printing out a Word file

Putting them together: Word plus index cards

Managing content with Evernote

Choosing Footnotes or Endnotes

The immediacy of footnotes

The finality of endnotes

The tidiness of in-text citations

Formatting citations

Chapter 15: Write Like a Journalist

Reading for Fun and Profit

Reading white papers

Reading related research

Reading for inspiration

Keeping a “swipe file”

Writing Winning White Papers

Getting to the point

Handling dialogue and sources

Creating text enhancements

Writing for translation

Choosing one metaphor and sticking with it

Controlling your material

Rewriting Before You Submit

Avoiding throat-clearing

Having your computer read your draft

Getting readability statistics on your text

Changing passive voice to active voice

Writing with Style

Learning from style guides

Following house style

Refining Your Writing Process

Figuring out your best time to write

Wearing the right hat at the right time

Allowing ideas to ferment

Tricking yourself to get started

Using a mind map

Writing in short bursts

Using positive affirmations

Challenging the myth of writer’s block

Chapter 16: Promote Like a Madman

Recognizing the Need for Promotion

Promoting a white paper like a product launch

Measuring your results

Digging up sales and revenue numbers

Repeating the most effective promotions

Continuing your promotions

Choosing the Right Promotional Tactics for Your White Paper

Beginning your promotion at home

Using cost-effective e-mail

Talking it up through social media

Getting it to the influencers

Promoting it through third parties

Using a slide deck

Talking about it face to face

Advertising, online and offline

Part V: The Part of Tens

Chapter 17: Ten White Paper Problems and How to Solve Them

Boring, Nondescript Title

No Summary at the Start

No Conclusions at the End

No Call to Action

Not the Right Length

Sales Pitch in Disguise

Not Enough Proof to Back Up Claims

Not Enough, or Not Good Enough, Graphics

No Logical Flow of Ideas

Not Written by the Right Person

Chapter 18: Ten Tips on Designing a White Paper

Design to Enhance the Content

Consider Your Readers’ Eyesight

Realize That Text Isn’t a Graphic

Make Every Page Count

Control Page Breaks

Avoid a Wall of Gray

Leave Lots of White Space

Avoid Smug Shots

Control Hyphenation

Refine a Corporate Template

Chapter 19: More Than Ten Ways to Spice Up a White Paper Title

Stressing the Benefits to Readers

Using Active Verbs, Not Passive Labels

Identifying Your Target Reader

Converting a Weak Title to a Subtitle

Why Not Try a Question?

Recasting Your Paper As a Numbered List

Using “How to” Phrasing

Leaving Out Product Names

Cutting Out Jargon and Buzzwords

Using Selected Keywords

Testing Titles in Advance

Cheat Sheet

OceanofPDF.com

Introduction

When I tell people I write white papers for a living, most look at me
with a blank expression. The bravest manage to ask, “Um, what are those
again?” I usually give a short answer like, “White papers are fact-based
marketing pieces for companies — a lot like the essays we wrote in
college.” Then we get back to talking about more-interesting topics,
like who’s the greatest rock-and-roll band, why anyone would ever drink
light beer, and our favorite oxymorons (mine is currently “jumbo
shrimp”).

But in my mind, I’m thinking, “White papers are a time-tested format for
long-form copy that combine expository and persuasive writing, whose
roots go back more than 100 years and whose future stretches ahead for
as long as companies sell anything relatively new, complex, and
expensive that needs explaining to a B2B prospect.” But I don’t actually
say all of that.

When I first commissioned a white paper, I was the marketing manager in
a fast-growing technology company. Before that, I’d spent many years as
a computer journalist and technical writer. I’d seen many white papers
from other companies, so I figured we needed one, too. I looked around
for advice, a book, or some helpful material on the web. Back in 1997,
the web was just getting started, and Google wasn’t available yet. I
didn’t find much guidance, so in two weeks, my team and I put together
something partway between a slide show and a specification. Amazing to
all, it turned out well enough that it helped close sales and won an
award for technical communication.

I rang in the new millennium with my first-ever assignment to write a
white paper. By then, I was working as an independent copywriter. (No, I
wasn’t fired for wasting money on white papers! The company did so well
that a competitor bought it out.) Once again, I scoured bookstores and
the web. By 2000, a little more material existed, including a few
articles called “How to Write a White Paper” and a couple of e-books for
$99 each. I read them all and learned a little, but clearly not quite
enough. My first freelance white paper project went around in circles
and dragged on for months.

That experience spurred me on to do better. Ever since, I’ve been
devouring everything I can find about white papers. In 2005, I set up my
website at ThatWhitePaperGuy.com and started posting articles there;
today, it features almost 100 how-to articles plus a white paper FAQ.
And by now, I’ve written close to 200 of these documents for companies
all the way from one-person startups to Google.

Not many people have studied, pondered, debated, and worked on so many
of these challenging documents. In this book, I share tips, advice, and
anecdotes about the wonderful world of white papers. When I first
started writing white papers, I would have loved a book like this one,
packed full of real-world tips and advice. Without it, I’ve spent 15
years learning on my own, reading everything I could get my hands on,
making every possible mistake, and comparing notes with the handful of
other writers struggling to develop high-quality white papers for the
21st century. This books sums up my knowledge so you can plan, produce,
and promote your own white papers effectively without going through all
of that.

About This Book

White Papers For Dummies strives to clearly explain the theory and
practice of using white papers in B2B content marketing. This book is
organized to make everything easy to find and simple to apply. It starts
with an overview of the power of white papers and the huge opportunity
they present to marketers and copywriters. Then it drills down into the
details, including the main flavors of these documents; a proven
step-by-step process for creating them; and a wealth of practical,
tactical advice on how to research and build an argument, express your
points in clear and accessible language, and promote your finished white
paper to the four corners of your market.

You won’t find this kind of detailed treatment of white papers in any
other book. I know, I’ve read them all. And whether you’re just getting
started with white papers or you’ve already created and published many
of them, White Papers For Dummies has something for you. If you’re a
marketing manager, this book reveals the benefits that white papers can
deliver to your company and shows you how to choose and develop the best
format to meet any marketing challenge. If you’re a writer, this book is
packed with tips on how to plan, research, write, and even design a
compelling document that stands head and shoulders above most other
white papers being circulated today.

Conventions Used in This Book

This book uses the following conventions to make things consistent and
easy to understand:

[check.png] Bold highlights key words in bulleted lists and the action
parts of numbered steps.

[check.png] New terms appear in italic, followed by an
easy-to-understand definition. And speaking of terms, here are a few I
use consistently throughout the book:

• B2B means “business-to-business” or selling to other businesses, the
total opposite of . . .

• B2C, which means “business-to-consumer” or selling to individual
consumers.

• FUD means “fear, uncertainty, and doubt,” a classic marketing tactic
used to undermine the competition.

• Offering means any B2B product, service, technology, or methodology
being sold by a company.

• SME means “subject matter expert” or someone who serves as a source
for a white paper, usually from the sponsoring company.

[check.png] Web addresses appear in monofont.

White papers are an extremely versatile form. You can write one about
any product, service, technology, methodology, regulation, policy, or
ethical or philosophical position on any issue. And beyond B2B vendors,
almost any type of organization can publish white papers.

So if you work for an agency, association, foundation, government
ministry or department, hospital, institute, military command,
municipality, nongovernmental organization (NGO), nonprofit, political
party, school, college, university, or yourself, substitute whatever
term works best for you whenever you see the words business, company,
enterprise, or vendor in this book. Don’t worry: You can apply virtually
all the tips and ideas in this book to your white paper projects, no
matter what type of organization you work for.

What You’re Not to Read

I know you’re busy, so I don’t expect you to read every word of this
book. To save you time, feel free to skip over the following elements:

[check.png] If you’re a B2B marketing person whose management team is
already completely sold on using white papers, you can skip Chapters 1
and 2.

[check.png] If you’re a writer who’s already convinced of the vast
opportunity in writing effective white papers, you can skip Chapter 2.

[check.png] You can also skip any sidebars, the shaded text boxes that
go into more detail than you may need on certain topics.

Foolish Assumptions

You know what they say about assumptions, right? But I have to start
somewhere, so here goes. My main foolish assumption about you, dear
reader, is that you’re either a B2B marketing person or a B2B copywriter
(or someone who aspires to become one).

[check.png] If you’re a B2B marketing person, I assume the following
about you:

• You want to use white papers to build recognition, generate leads,
nurture prospects, and help close sales for your company.

• You’re quite interested in how to plan or promote white papers
effectively.

• You’re less interested in how to research and create a white paper,
although this knowledge will help you be a better client when you hire a
white paper writer or designer.

• You have a basic understanding of marketing with content.

[check.png] If you’re a B2B copywriter, I assume the following:

• You’re keen to understand how to create white papers and offer that
service to your clients.

• You work as an independent freelancer — although if you work as an
in-house writer, 95 percent of this book applies to you, too.

• You’re quite interested in how to research and write effective white
papers because these marketable skills are in high demand.

• You’re less interested in how to plan or promote a white paper,
although this knowledge can help you be a better supplier when a client
engages you.

• You’re a seasoned writer, who has no need for me to point out one end
of a sentence from the other.

• You’re willing to go back to school and rediscover how to dig for
solid research to help prove the points of your arguments. If you need a
refresher on research techniques, check out Geraldine Wood’s excellent
book Research Papers For Dummies (Wiley).

How This Book Is Organized

This book has five parts, which you can read in any order. The five
parts start from a high-level overview and zoom down into more detail.
For example, the first chapter sketches in how B2B marketing uses white
papers, while the last shows ten ways to pump up a white paper title.

Part I: Getting Started with White Papers

White papers have been called “the king of content” because of their
profound ability to engage B2B prospects through a complex sales cycle.
This part describes how white papers have become a standard marketing
tool for B2B vendors in a growing number of sectors and shows the
untapped demand for writers who have mastered this format. It also looks
at where white papers emerged more than 100 years ago, where they are
now, and the most likely possibilities for their future. And this part
is where you find the answers to the most common questions about white
papers, organized by the five w’s (and one h): who, what, why, where,
when, and how.

Part II: The Three Flavors of White Papers

This part simplifies the vast possibilities of white papers down to a
simple choice of three flavors of ice cream:

[check.png] Vanilla is a plain and predictable backgrounder, a detailed
description focused on the technical or business benefits of a specific
offering.

[check.png] Strawberry is a light and lively numbered list, framed
around a set of tips, questions, concerns, or points about some issue.

[check.png] Chocolate is a rich and satisfying persuasive essay that
delves into a nagging business problem and a new, improved way to solve
it.

These three flavors cover 90 percent of all B2B white papers in the
world today. This part explains how to pick the perfect flavor for your
next white paper, depending on your purpose and audience. And for each
flavor, I recommend what to include, what to leave out, when to use it
for best results, and how to repurpose that content into further
marketing pieces. This part also describes what happens when you mash up
different flavors of white papers: Two possibilities turn out well,
while two make a mess that’s tough to stomach.

Part III: From Foggy Idea to Finished Document

This part describes a step-by-step process for transforming a vague idea
into a polished, effective white paper — even if you’ve never done one
before. This process grew out of my hands-on experience with close to
200 white papers over the past 15 years. Some steps will be familiar to
anyone with writing or publishing experience; others are new and unique,
designed to help you avoid the most common pitfalls in any white paper
project.

Part IV: Succeeding with White Papers

This part shows how to succeed in writing white papers by following
three simple maxims: Think like a lawyer, write like a journalist, and
promote like a madman. This part explains how to research a white paper
and build an open-and-shut case with a mountain of irrefutable evidence
and ironclad logic. Then it describes how to write clear, crisp, and
compelling text as fast as any reporter — and with more accuracy. Then
it describes how to get the word out about your white paper, using your
choice of 40 promotional tactics with tips and insights on each one.

Part V: The Part of Tens

This part provides a summary of key pointers to follow to make sure your
white papers succeed. Topics include problems that can strike when
you’re writing, designing, or naming a white paper and what to do about
them; how to design a white paper effectively; and how to give it a
title that gets noticed.

Icons Used in This Book

To make this book easier to read and simpler to use, the following icons
mark off different sections of the text.

[tip.eps] This icon points to advice you can use to help make your next
white paper more persuasive, more readable, or better designed, or to
help the whole process run smoother.

[remember.eps] Any time you see this icon, remember: What follows is so
important that it’s worth reading more than once. Think of these as the
key take-away messages from the book.

[truestory_property.eps] This icon appears next to any personal anecdote
from my years as a marketing manager and white paper writer. These
stories often show me bumbling my way through some project and seeing
the real solution only in hindsight.

[warning_bomb.eps] This icon flags any serious danger to the health of
your next white paper. Pay attention: The white paper you save may be
your own.

Where to Go from Here

This book is organized so you can dip in anywhere and find useful tips
and advice. For more guidance, use the table of contents to find broad
categories and the index to look up specific topics.

If you’re not sure where to begin, start with Part I for an introduction
to white papers and answers to the most common questions about them. If
you’re just starting a new white paper, you may want to begin with
Chapter 5 for help picking the perfect flavor. Then review the specific
chapter for that flavor in Part II to see what to put in and what to
leave out. After that, Part III lays out a step-by-step plan for
developing your white paper. If you have a white paper drafted and ready
for design, check out Part V to make sure you’ve avoided all the common
problems with content and titles and to find some useful design tips to
pass on to your designer. And if you have a finished white paper that
you need to start promoting, Chapter 16 is your best bet.

OceanofPDF.com

Part I

Getting Started with White Papers

[9781118496923-pp0101.eps]

[pt_webextra_bw.TIF] Visit www.dummies.com for access to great Dummies
content online.

In this part . . .

[check.png] See how white papers are revolutionizing B2B marketing.

[check.png] Find out how the demand for white paper writers outweighs
the supply and how much you can earn writing them.

[check.png] Take a look at how white papers are shaping decision making
today and how they’re likely to influence business practices in the
future.

[check.png] Discover who writes and reads white papers, when it makes
sense to use these persuasive essays, and how to figure out if you need
one.

OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 1

Unleashing the Power of White Papers

In This Chapter

[arrow] Getting familiar with the ultimate form of content: white papers

[arrow] Acknowledging trends and avoiding typical problems with white
papers

[arrow] Tracing the rise of white papers in business-to-business
marketing

[arrow] Using white papers at the top, middle, and bottom of the sales
funnel

[arrow] Understanding which sectors use white papers today and which
others could

Have you ever had to look into buying something big for your company?
I’m not talking about an espresso machine for the lunchroom; I mean
something really big. Something like when your boss calls you into his
office and says, “We’ve got a problem. We’ve got to find a way to get
our team out from under all this paper. We’re drowning in it.” And he
wants you to dig into the problem and report back with some suggestions
by Friday. Gulp.

What do you do? If you’re like most people, you head to your desk and
start madly searching the web for phrases like “buried in paper” or
“paper burden.” You skim down the search results until you see something
promising. You click on the link and go to a web page — and what do you
find? Ideally, you find a thoughtful examination of your problem with
some useful tips on how to overcome it, most often in a document called
a white paper. Armed with a few good white papers, you can prepare to
make your report.

The same scenario happens every day in companies all over the world.
Businesses buy loads of things, and business people need help deciding
what to buy. An effective white paper is the best source for this kind
of help.

In this chapter, I introduce you to white papers and show how business
people use these documents to help select products and services worth
many billions of dollars a year. I describe how any business that sells
to other businesses can benefit by using white papers in its marketing.
Whether you’re a marketing person or a copywriter, this chapter shows
how you can benefit from the amazing power and reach of white papers,
which are truly the “king of content.”

Seeing a White Paper for What It Is

Maybe you’re already familiar with white papers because you’ve read them
or even written one or two yourself. Or maybe you have a fuzzy idea
about white papers but aren’t sure how to describe them. Here’s the
definition I use:

A white paper is a persuasive essay that uses facts and logic to promote
a certain product, service, or solution to a problem.

Notice the key elements in this definition. A white paper is persuasive
but somewhat formal like an essay because it uses facts and logic to
make its points and to promote some product, service, or solution.

And here’s what a white paper isn’t. A white paper isn’t a sales pitch.
A white paper isn’t an advertisement, brochure, case study, direct mail
piece, or flier. It doesn’t have a “Buy Now” button. It doesn’t say how
good you’ll feel to see your new purchase sitting in your office.

Instead of a sales pitch, an effective white paper provides useful,
practical, and educational content. Companies use white papers to
generate leads, nurture prospects, and build mindshare (as I describe in
more detail later in this chapter).

Of course, every white paper must be tailored to a specific audience and
a desired outcome. To make that easier for you, this book identifies
three basic types of white papers and shows how to use each one in
different situations. And to make the writing experience as smooth as
possible, I outline my 12-step process that takes you through a white
paper’s creation from start to finish.

Getting the scoop on the three flavors of white papers

You may think there are many types of white papers with subtle
variations that make them hard to tell apart. In fact, there are only
three main flavors of white papers, plus the mixtures between them. And
they’re as simple to tell apart as vanilla, strawberry, and chocolate
ice cream.

[check.png] A backgrounder is an old-fashioned type of white paper that
focuses on the features, functions, benefits, and payback of a product
or service from one vendor. You can say this flavor “zooms in” on one
offering to describe it in depth. A backgrounder is so simple, classic,
and predictable that I think of it as vanilla ice cream (more on that in
Chapter 6).

[check.png] A numbered list is a lively set of questions, points,
issues, or tips about a certain topic. This format is extremely popular
and easy to skim. And you can combine it with either of the other two
types of white papers. Because a numbered list is so light and easy to
digest, I like to compare it to strawberry ice cream (to see what I
mean, skip to Chapter 7).

[check.png] A problem/solution is a factual discussion of a major
problem that has never been solved. It considers the scope of the
problem, describes the existing solutions and their drawbacks, and
recommends a new, improved solution for best results. You can say this
flavor “zooms out” to give a high-level overview of an entire industry.
The problem/solution is the hardest-working and longest-lasting white
paper of all. And a problem/solution white paper is so rich and long
lasting that I compare it to chocolate ice cream (see Chapter 8 for
details).

Following a proven system for creating white papers

Doing a white paper is a big, challenging project, far tougher than
writing a blog or a sales letter. A white paper must be packed with
research and useful information and run at least five pages with an
attractive design. Many people are involved, and many things can go
wrong. To help you keep all your white paper projects on track and avoid
making common mistakes, I provide a 12-step process for planning and
producing a white paper — the very same process I use with my own
clients. Here’s how it goes:

1. Assemble the team. Pull together all the people you need to complete
the white paper, such as a writer, a designer, an illustrator, subject
matter experts, and reviewers.

2. Hold the initial conference call. Discuss the project and get
everyone on the same page. If any differences arise, sort them out now
to avoid surprises later.

3. Prepare the plan. Write up a brief plan for the white paper.
Circulate and tweak it until all reviewers approve.

4. Gather your research. Take a deep dive into the subject through
company background, web research, and interviews with experts.

5. Prepare an executive summary. Write a one-page summary of the white
paper’s proposed direction. Circulate it until all reviewers approve.

6. Create the first draft of the paper and graphics. Write the first
full-length draft of the white paper and create graphics to go with it.

7. Get the first round of feedback. Gather comments from all reviewers
on the text and graphics. Clarify any unclear or contradictory comments.

8. Revise to create the second draft. Rework the first-draft text and
graphics to incorporate comments.

9. Solicit a second round of feedback. Gather comments from all
reviewers on the second-draft text and graphics.

10. Collect and check sources. Prepare a bundle of sources to spot-check
and file away for later reference, if needed.

11. Prepare the final document. Finalize the text, graphics, and page
design for the finished white paper. Generate the final PDF.

12. Wrap up the project. Take care of any payments, permissions, and
postmortem to tie up any loose ends.

I explain each of these steps in detail in Chapters 12 and 13, including
who does what and any common pitfalls to watch out for along the way.
And in Chapter 16, I describe 40 tactics you can use to promote a
finished white paper to your target audience and note which ones are
must-do’s.

Declaring White Papers the “King of Content”

My personal experiences plus a stream of survey results for many years
have convinced me that white papers are the top of the pops, the cap of
the pyramid, the acme, the pinnacle, the absolute king of content. In
fact, I believe white papers are the single most powerful piece of
content any business-to-business (B2B) vendor can create. Why do I say
so? Because no other piece of content can generate so many business
benefits for so long — when it’s done right.

But sadly, most white papers aren’t nearly as engaging or persuasive as
they could be. Three serious drawbacks afflict many white papers: too
much selling, too much hype, and too much focus on the vendor.

The following sections show how B2B buyers appreciate effective white
papers, discuss how to avoid the three worst flaws, and provide a “white
paper mantra” to help you stay focused on creating the best possible
documents.

[truestory_property.eps] When I was a marketing executive, my team tried
everything in the playbook: advertising, case studies, channel
promotions, direct mail, microsites, placed articles, press releases,
sales calls, slide decks, trade shows, and white papers. You name it, we
tried it. The two tactics that topped everything for generating leads
and building mindshare were case studies and white papers. We had to
keep producing more case studies every quarter, but we needed only one
or two white papers a year. Nothing could touch a white paper for
generating a strong return on the effort we invested in it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Separating B2C from B2B

You see one side of the economy every time you go to a corner store or
the mall. Think about a grocery store that sells everything from soup to
nuts. Any company that makes any product you can find in that store,
from A1 Steak Sauce to Ziploc containers, is called business-to-consumer
or B2C. Most of these companies advertise on TV, radio, and on the web,
trying to burn their logos into people’s brains. Making a B2C purchase
in a store is simple: You just pick out what you want and pay for it.

The other side of the economy is harder to spot, but it’s there. Every
company needs things to run the business, and they have to get them
somewhere. This type of shopping, where business people buy something
for their company, is called business-to-business or B2B. Making a B2B
purchase is more complicated: It involves more people, time, paperwork,
and money.

When a businessperson buys a major item like accounting software,
factory equipment, or lab services, the process is much more deliberate
than running to the store to pick up a can of beans. The decision can
involve a group of people — as many as 25! — who talk about it for
weeks, months, or even years. The ticket price can be huge, up to tens
of millions of dollars. The buying committee always looks at the
cost/benefit of the purchase and figures out how long it will take to
see a payback on that money, also known as the return on investment
(ROI).

This kind of B2B transaction is called a complex sale. The B2B economy
involves millions of complex sales every year, adding up to many
billions of dollars. Today’s B2B buyers need information to help them
make their decisions, and they find a lot of it in white papers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Seeing the growing trend to white papers

In 2002, I ran a Google search for “white papers” that yielded 2.8
million hits. A decade later, in 2012, the same search got 39.5 million
hits — 14 times as many. Clearly, during those ten years, a lot more
people started talking about white papers, and a lot more companies
started using them. But you don’t have to take my word for it.

The effectiveness of white papers at generating leads, nurturing
prospects, and building mindshare has been recognized in survey after
survey and study after study. Here are some specifics that confirm the
power of these documents in B2B marketing:

[check.png] “Probably the most important tool in the B2B marketer’s kit
is the white paper.” — MarketingSherpa, June 15, 2011

[check.png] “When done right, nothing pulls in qualified sales leads
like a well-targeted offer for a juicy white paper.” — marketing guru
Larry Chase, March 7, 2011

[check.png] White papers “continue to be the ‘must-have’ asset in the
technology marketer’s toolkit.” Two out of three B2B buyers surveyed
find white papers “very” or “extremely influential” in buying decisions.
— Eccolo Media 2011 B2B Technology Collateral Survey Report, October
2011

[check.png] White papers are the favorite sources for 64 percent of B2B
buyers during the early stages of decision making, higher than any other
type of marketing collateral. — Sirius Decision, 2010

[check.png] Sixty-one percent of all B2B marketers surveyed use white
papers. — Content Marketing Institute, 2012

[check.png] White papers are the most popular form of content for B2B
technology buyers in Australia, France, Italy, New Zealand, South
Africa, the United Kingdom, and the United States (and the second-most
popular in Germany and India). — TechTarget, 2010

Spotting three flaws in many white papers

So all you have to do is type up a few white papers, promote the heck
out of them so they show up in Google, and wait for the sales to roll
in, right? Well, not exactly. Not all white papers are created equal.

I’ve followed this field for close to 20 years as a journalist,
marketing executive, and copywriter, looking at fresh white papers every
week. And I’m sad to say that the vast majority of the documents I’ve
seen have been much less engaging and persuasive than they should have
been. Far too many white papers suffer from the critical flaws outlined
in the following three sections.

Too much selling, too little useful information

Far from providing helpful information, too many white papers are just a
sales pitch in disguise. They may have a promising title and a
good-looking cover, but the guts amount to little more than a brochure.
Surveys show that business people want useful information, not a sales
pitch.

[warning_bomb.eps] If your white paper is little more than a sales
pitch, the business people who see it will be irritated and deeply
disappointed. Why wouldn’t they be? You committed two of the worst
infractions in business: You lied to them, and you wasted their time.
Unless your company is the only game in town, they’ll probably knock you
off their list of possible suppliers. They may even start saying nasty
things about you to other B2B buyers and in forums across the web.
Rather than help your company’s cause, a poor white paper can actually
set you back by generating negative word of mouth and turning off
prospective buyers.

Too much hype, too little proof

If your white paper avoids becoming a sales pitch and you honestly try
to fill it with useful information, a second pitfall awaits: Making
claims with no proof to support them. I’m surprised how many people have
forgotten everything they learned about writing essays in college. To
build an argument, you don’t just state your views as though they’re
self-evident. You need to go out and find evidence to support what
you’re saying. If you can’t find any proof to support your argument,
your white paper is nothing but hot air. For tips on how to research a
white paper and build a strong argument, see Chapter 14.

Too much focus on the seller, not the buyer

No B2B buyer cares a fig about your company’s history, awards,
state-of-the-art research labs, or total commitment to quality. Buyers
care only about their problem and whether you can help them with it. If
you can, they may take a few moments to check out all your company’s
achievements. But if you lead with those in your white paper, you’ll
lose them for sure.

You can’t afford to look at a white paper as just another piece of
marketing collateral. You can’t get away with trotting out the same
marketing speak and indulging in the same chest-beating. White papers
are different. Your readers look at everything from their perspective as
B2B buyers with a problem. Unless you put yourself in their shoes,
answer their questions, and provide information with real value, they
won’t even bother to finish your paper.

Those are the three biggest problems, but there’s more. You can see the
top ten white paper problems to avoid in Chapter 17.

Using a mantra to avoid problems

A simple way to avoid all the problems in the previous sections is to
use a mantra every time you think about a white paper. Repeat it as
often as you need. Post it on a sticky note to your screen. E-mail it
around to your whole team and to any writer working on a white paper for
you. The following mantra provides an excellent summary of what the best
white papers do:

[remember.eps] An effective white paper helps prospective B2B buyers
understand an issue, solve a problem, or make a decision.

An effective white paper doesn’t fall all over itself to make a sales
pitch. It doesn’t make silly promises or unsupported claims. Instead, it
gives a B2B buyer well-researched facts and logical arguments. If your
white paper can do that, your company is seen as a trusted advisor,
elevated far above any run-of-the-mill vendors that are just trying to
peddle their wares.

From this heavenly position, all the usual objections about price or
delivery often melt away in the warm glow of the sun. Your white paper
has impressed your B2B prospects so much that they want to do business
with you, and only you. Congratulations! If you do all of that, you
reach white paper nirvana.

Understanding Today’s Complex Sale

Companies sell to business buyers differently from how they sell to
consumers. The challenge of reaching business buyers is called B2B
marketing. For many years, the only way to do B2B marketing was through
outbound marketing, where a company goes out and beats the bushes to
find customers with advertising, direct mail, telemarketing, or even
door-to-door salespeople.

The Internet forced B2B marketing to develop several new approaches:
first, permission marketing, then SEO/SEM/social media marketing, and
finally content marketing. These last two methods fit within inbound
marketing, where a vendor encourages B2B buyers to come to it online.
Inbound marketing is really in tune with the times because most B2B
buyers now do their own research without relying on salespeople. Google
plays a huge role in content marketing; if your company isn’t on the
first page of Google’s search results, it doesn’t exist.

These are all huge changes from just a few years ago. And these changes
help explain the meteoric rise in the number and influence of B2B white
papers over the past 15 years.

B2B marketing has evolved quickly

For many years, B2B marketing consisted of buying ads, sending out
mailings, handing out trinkets at trade shows, and cold calling, in the
hope that 1 or 2 percent of the people who heard your message were ready
to buy whatever you were selling.

But in the past 20 years, this whole field has turned upside down.
Today, marketers have better-targeted and less-expensive ways to reach
B2B buyers and keep them engaged throughout a complex sale. Table 1-1
shows four approaches to B2B marketing, two each for outbound and
inbound marketing. The bottom line is pretty convincing: Inbound
marketing with content is up to 62 percent less expensive per lead than
outbound.

[Four Approaches to B2B Marketing]

Interruption marketing is out

Advertising on radio and TV, direct mail, and cold calling all interrupt
whatever you’re doing to give you a sales pitch. YouTube also interrupts
you when you have to watch a commercial before you can see the cute
kitten playing the piano. You tell me whether that works: Do you
remember whose ad ran before the kitten? These techniques afflict B2B
marketing, too. For example, legions of B2B telemarketers still hit the
phones every morning, dialing for dollars. Although it can work on some
of the people some of the time, it’s irritating, wasteful, and
expensive.

Permission marketing is so 1999

In the late 1990s, an amazing new concept emerged: What if a company
actually got your permission before it interrupted you? Getting your
permission can take many forms: You sign up for a newsletter, subscribe
to an RSS feed, or drop your card into a fishbowl at a booth. Marketers
call this raising your hand to show that you’re interested. Permission
marketing does save a lot of time, trouble, and annoyance. With it, a
B2B vendor knows everyone on its list has some interest in what the
company sells. But it still relies on “pushing” promotions at possible
buyers, interrupting all those people.

Marketing with SEO, SEM, and social media is in (sort of)

More recently, another approach came to the fore: Why not use the web
and Google to attract customers to you? The first wave of inbound
marketing used search engine optimization (SEO) and search engine
marketing (SEM) to match a company’s website to what B2B buyers were
searching for.

Then came social media, which is still creating a huge buzz. Social
media is fine for B2C buyers who can “like” a fast-food company and get
a coupon for $1 off their next meal. But it’s much harder to use in B2B
marketing, where buyers take a more systematic approach to making a much
bigger purchase. Most business people never “like” any supplier on
Facebook or follow one on Twitter; they’re too busy doing their real
jobs.

Marketing with content is growing fast

Content marketing builds on SEO, SEM, and social media by providing the
missing ingredient that all these approaches depend on: engaging content
that B2B buyers actually want to access. Social media can be an ideal
channel for promoting the great content that a B2B vendor has to offer.
Posted online, that content works 24/7 and tends to snowball over time
as people pass around materials, retweet links, and discuss the company.

Marketing with content enables you to focus like a laser on the B2B
buyers who are most likely to buy next. And this approach is getting
bigger every year. The 2013 benchmark report from the Content Marketing
Institute surveyed 1,416 marketers who said they now spend, on average,
one-third of their budgets on content marketing. And a lot of this
funding has been taken away from the outbound side of the budget.
Because white papers are a “must-have” tool in the content marketer’s
toolkit, they’re being swept along with this fast-moving trend.

Today’s B2B buyers do their own research

Before the Internet, the B2B salesperson was a powerful gatekeeper. Now,
B2B buyers find their own information and call up a salesperson at the
very last moment, maybe never. That means the life of a B2B salesperson
isn’t a happy one. Many salespeople have been effectively replaced by
content placed online and indexed by Google. And when a B2B vendor gets
noticed and blessed by Google, content marketing works like a dream,
generating leads and helping to cement sales for far less cost than any
salesperson.

Closing the door on salespeople

Every B2B buyer used to have to talk to a salesperson to get the
smallest scrap of information, even a brochure or data sheet sent by
snail mail. B2B salespeople were the gatekeepers holding all the
information about their company’s offerings. Today, that’s gone out the
window. Surveys show that 80 to 90 percent of all B2B buyers now do
their own product research, thank you very much.

B2B buyers can use the web to find all the information they need to
evaluate a purchase, along with reviews and recommendations from other
business people who bought the same thing. Calling a salesperson is now
one of the last steps in any purchase. In other words, salespeople have
been cut out of the action.

Getting noticed by Google

Google has become the great god of inbound marketing, serving the vast
majority of all searches done around the world and leading B2B buyers to
the companies they do business with. How many people ever look past the
first page of their search results? No one outside Google knows exactly
how it evaluates websites. But one thing’s for sure: If your company has
fresh, helpful content on its website, Google will move your company up
in the search results, past other companies that lack this kind of
content.

Many companies still use their websites as an electronic brochure with
nothing beyond the expected information about their location, product
line, and undying commitment to customer service. Ho hum. That won’t get
you noticed by Google. Having effective content can mean the difference
between being noticed in Google or ignored. These days, not many B2B
vendors can afford to be ignored by Google.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Checking out content marketing in action

When your boss asks you to look for a solution to your company’s paper
burden, what do you do? Well, the marketing team at Acme Scanners
anticipated your searches and put together a white paper designed to
help B2B buyers like you understand the issue of paper burden. That
white paper offers practical tips on solving the problem and urges you
to take the next step: using an online calculator to see how much your
company can save by buying a few Acme ScanOMatic 3000s.

And because Acme’s content is good, and its SEO, SEM, and social media
promotions are solid, Google noticed Acme and put it on the first page
of the search results for the keywords “paper burden,” which you type in
when you do your Googling, which brings you to Acme’s white paper, which
you click to download. This is content marketing in action, exactly the
way it’s supposed to work.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Profiting from White Papers

As I touch on in “Getting the scoop on the three flavors of white
papers,” earlier in this chapter, white papers come in three main
flavors. A backgrounder focuses on the technical details and business
benefits of a certain offering. A numbered list rounds up a set of
questions, points, or tips about a certain issue. And a problem/solution
describes a new, improved solution to an industry-wide problem. Each
flavor has unique strengths that make it most effective for B2B buyers
at the top, middle, or bottom of the sales funnel. When you understand
the key differences between these three flavors of white papers, you can
select the best flavor to meet whatever marketing challenge you’re
facing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The funnel as a numbers game

Throughout this book, I refer to the funnel as shorthand for a classic
theory about B2B sales. In case you never studied marketing, here’s how
the theory goes: A complex sale is like a funnel, and each buyer a drop
of water. As shown in the figure, the funnel is wide at the top and
narrow at the bottom, but it leaks all the way down.

[9781118496923-sb0101.eps]

Illustration by Wiley, Composition Services Graphics

Here’s how the funnel works. Say a company, such as Acme Scanners, seeks
to attract B2B buyers into the top of the funnel. This step is called
generating leads or filling the funnel. Acme uses a great white paper to
attract potential buyers looking for help with a certain problem, such
as paper burden, even if they’ve never heard of Acme.

Next, the Acme marketing team determines which leads seem most
promising. Some may match the profile of an ideal customer. Some may
have an urgent problem, so they’re on a fast track to buy. Others may
not fit, have no urgent need, or lose interest in Acme; all those leak
away. But some stay in the funnel, where they’re now called prospects.
Acme nurtures prospects by providing more value, often in the form of
useful content (hint, hint). Naturally enough, this process corresponds
to the middle part of the funnel, where it begins to narrow.

Sooner or later, each serious prospect that remains in the funnel
creates a shortlist of possible vendors, and Acme wants to be on that
list. Of course, the narrowest part of the funnel is the tube at the
bottom. That’s where more prospects lose interest or buy from someone
else. Only a few prospects buy from Acme and drip out the bottom of the
funnel as paying customers.

The funnel is a simple image, but it conveys a profound truth: Every B2B
vendor must attract far more leads than it needs to close, because some
leak away at every stage. In other words, B2B selling is a numbers game.

If someone at Acme keeps track, he can develop metrics around its
funnel. For example, say that a two-year pattern shows that for every
ten leads, five become prospects, and two end up buying. The marketing
team can then calculate how many leads it must generate to reach certain
sales targets.

The following table shows some sample revenue goals, where the typical
deal size is $100,000. You can see that to reach $10 million in sales,
Acme needs to generate 500 leads. It takes a lot of phone calls and
expensive mailings to generate that many leads with outbound marketing
alone.

Here’s the beauty of marketing with content. An effective white paper
posted on Acme’s website can generate leads 24/7 for a year or two with
no further effort. No other marketing tactic can do that. Of course, one
white paper alone may not bring in all 500 leads that generate $10
million in sales. But it might. The performance of each white paper is
another metric Acme can track. Then the company can start to predict how
many white papers it needs to generate X number of leads and Y dollars
of sales. Marketing with content is a numbers game, too.

[Leads, Prospects, Customers, and Revenues]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

At the top of the funnel

White papers are especially useful at the top of the sales funnel for
generating leads and educating your own sales force (if any); channel
partners like distributors or resellers (if any); and opinion leaders,
like analysts, bloggers, and journalists who cover your market. You can
also use white papers for the more ambitious project of redefining a
market space and the all-around goal of building mindshare.

[remember.eps] The best flavors of white papers to use at the top of the
funnel are a problem/solution, a numbered list, or a mash-up of the two.

Generating leads

The simplest way to generate leads is to provide content that follows
the white paper mantra to help a B2B buyer understand an issue, solve a
problem, or make a decision. Because most business people Google their
issues, problems, or upcoming decisions, a well-targeted
problem/solution white paper that discusses an industry-wide problem —
backed up with a good promotional campaign — should appear in all the
appropriate search results.

For example, a problem/solution white paper from Acme Scanners could be
called “How to Get Out from Under a Mountain of Paper with Unattended
Scanning.” (For tips on how to create and use a problem/solution white
paper, see Chapter 8.)

Another way to get attention and attract leads is to be provocative.
That certainly works for Lady Gaga. In B2B marketing, you can’t exactly
drape your product in a meat dress, but you can still be outspoken. A
white paper formatted as a numbered list can challenge perceived wisdom,
knock down sacred cows, and generate heat and light that attracts
attention and draws in onlookers. For example, a provocative numbered
list from Acme could be called “7 Gotchas in Automated Scanning and How
to Avoid Falling for Them.” (For tips on how to create and use a
numbered list, see Chapter 7.)

Educating salespeople and partners

A vendor’s own sales force can benefit from hearing all the powerful
arguments and detailed information in a white paper. They can use these
same proof points and arguments when they interact with prospects, or
they can pass the white paper along directly to possible buyers.

Channel partners can include any distributors, resellers, retailers, and
consultants that work with your company plus add-on marketers that
create products, such as books, newsletters, or training for your
product. Any flavor of white paper can be useful to these groups.
Because they’re involved with B2B buyers from top to bottom of the
funnel, channel partners or add-on marketers can give your white paper
directly to a lead or prospective buyer. Just remember: Many vendors
compete for the limited time and attention of partners. If you have
better white papers than your competition, you can win more mindshare
with channel partners, which can pay off in more sales.

Redefining a market space

Sometimes a new company wants to shake up an existing market space.
Sometimes an established company wants to expand into neighboring
markets. Sometimes a company wants to shrink and refocus all its efforts
on one promising niche. All these strategies call for redefining a
market space, which is extremely challenging. A white paper can spell
out the company’s best thinking on the limitations or opportunities
facing it and why the management team wants to set out in a new
direction.

[warning_bomb.eps] Of all the goals you can have for a white paper,
redefining a market space is the most ambitious. It can take a couple of
years and more than a million dollars’ worth of publicity to create a
new technology buzzword and lodge it into people’s minds. One white
paper alone won’t do it; it could take 10 or 20.

Building mindshare

You can think of mindshare as the answer to a couple of questions: “How
many people in your target market have heard of your company?” and “How
many of those people think your company has something useful to offer?”
The more, the better. You want to send your white papers to all the
analysts, bloggers, and journalists who cover your market. You want your
white paper to spread through word of mouth and social media and be
passed around the company and to peers in other companies. To find out
many possible tactics about how to promote a white paper, see Chapter
16.

[tip.eps] In general, the easier it is to access a white paper, the more
mindshare it generates. An obnoxious registration form with too many
pesky questions can kill the interest in even the best white paper. If
you don’t use any registration gate, a white paper tends to spread much
farther and faster. So if you’re aiming more for mindshare than for
leads, stay away from registration.

Throughout the funnel

White papers can also be useful at the middle of the sales funnel,
during the long period when a complex sale is deliberated. During this
period, white papers can engage and nurture B2B prospects and cast fear,
uncertainty, and doubt (FUD) on competitors to try to knock them off the
prospect’s shortlist.

[remember.eps] The best flavors of white papers to use at the middle of
the funnel are a numbered list or a mash-up of a numbered list and
problem/solution. The numbered list format is always easy to scan and
entertaining to read.

Nurturing B2B prospects

By the middle of the funnel, you can assume that a prospect has heard of
your company and engaged somewhat with you. But you must keep your
prospects interested through the long decision-making process ahead.
Publishing a new white paper as a numbered list gives you a good reason
to contact them without making a sales pitch. At this point in the
funnel, prospects are more likely to notice and skim through a lively
numbered list than a more detailed technical white paper that requires a
lot more focus and thought.

Casting FUD on competitors

By the middle of the funnel, the B2B buyer has most likely drawn up a
shortlist of possible vendors with two or three companies on it. You can
use a white paper to throw mud at those competitors, darken their name
in the buyer’s eyes, and ideally knock them off the shortlist. This
classic marketing technique is called FUD (fear, uncertainty, and
doubt). For example, Acme could use a numbered list called “8 Things You
Should Know Before You Buy an Automated Scanner.” By appealing to a
buyer’s fear of failure or embarrassment, uncertainty about a
lesser-known vendor or product, or doubt about the claims made by
competitors, this kind of white paper can effectively block an opponent.
For more tips on FUD and how to use it, see Chapter 7.

At the bottom of the funnel

Even at the bottom of the funnel, white papers have a role to play. It’s
too late now to impress buyers with the scope of your company’s vision
in a problem/solution or to titillate them with provocative comments in
a numbered list. At the bottom of the funnel, it’s time for facts and
figures.

[remember.eps] The best flavor to use at the bottom of the funnel is a
backgrounder. A backgrounder provides the technical details and payback
numbers an evaluator needs to make a recommendation to the B2B buying
committee.

When prospects finally reach the bottom of the funnel, they want to do
their due diligence on each vendor on their shortlist. A knowledgeable
person from the prospect’s company often gets the job of evaluating all
the choices, figuring out the strengths and weaknesses of each one, and
reporting back with some recommendations. At this point, a backgrounder
packed with technical details and benefits can really help that person
complete his evaluation. For example, this kind of backgrounder from
Acme could be called “Fifth-Generation Technology Innovations in the
Acme ScanOMatic 3000.” (For tips on how to create and use a
backgrounder, see Chapter 6.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Can white papers help close sales?

You can debate whether a white paper can help close a deal. Just before
B2B buyers make a decision, they’re more likely looking at data sheets,
configurations, and delivery dates and checking references from existing
customers.

Most marketers believe white papers are more powerful at the top and
middle of the funnel to help generate leads and nurture prospects, and
not so useful at the bottom to help close sales. I tend to agree, but
there’s a little more to the story. The latest surveys show that B2B
buyers still look at white papers even in the last stage of making a
purchase.

And when B2B buyers get right down to making a decision, the cumulative
effect of the white papers they’ve seen (or not seen) plays a part in
their decision. If one vendor consistently provided useful, helpful, and
professional white papers that stood head and shoulders above the
competition, that certainly gives that vendor an edge.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Late in the buying process, each vendor puts in a last-ditch effort to
impress a prospect with the unmatched strengths of its offering. And if
one of the companies on the shortlist has no technical white papers to
contribute at this point, can you imagine what that does to its chances?

Discovering Who Uses White Papers and Who Should

B2B marketers in many sectors routinely use white papers as a standard
tool in their marketing toolkit. In other sectors, white papers are just
starting to be known. And in some, these documents are seldom or never
seen. The sectors that most often use white papers today include

[check.png] Business services: Finance, HR, insurance, marketing, and
outsourcing

[check.png] Electrical manufacturers: Audio-video gear, components,
lighting, and heavy power equipment

[check.png] Electronic manufacturers: Chipmakers, computers,
peripherals, and printers

[check.png] Government: Policy positions, research reports, and trial
balloons

[check.png] Healthcare: Device makers, pharmaceuticals, and medical
product and service providers

[check.png] Manufacturers of B2B equipment: Aerospace, heavy equipment,
factory systems, processing equipment, ships, transit systems, and
trains

[check.png] NGOs and nonprofits: Policy and position papers and research
reports

[check.png] Processors of B2B materials: Glass, metals, plastic, rare
earths, and silicon

[check.png] Software: Any B2B software except apps selling for $1

[check.png] Technical services: Engineers, laboratories, quality
control, and testing

The following sectors could certainly benefit from using white papers:

[check.png] Construction: New materials, methods, and technologies

[check.png] Consultants: New methodologies or data, such as using social
media for marketing, research, and customer engagement

[check.png] Delivery and transport: Energy efficiency, fleet management,
and new RFID or tracking systems

[check.png] Education: New methods and technologies, online and distance
learning, and reports to attract donors, students, and funding

[check.png] Energy, oil and gas: New approaches like fracking, pipeline,
or cleanup technologies

[check.png] Environmental or “green tech”: New technologies and methods
for everything from light bulbs to monitoring the oceans

[check.png] Real estate: New B2B business models, construction materials
and ­methods, energy efficiency, and renovations

[check.png] Utilities: Energy efficiency, smart meters, and smart grid

In fact, you can ask three simple questions to determine whether any B2B
company could benefit from white papers:

[check.png] Does the company sell something relatively new?

[check.png] Does it sell something relatively complex?

[check.png] Does it sell something relatively expensive?

If you answer “yes” to one of these questions, that company could
probably use white papers. If you answer “yes” to two or three
questions, that company can definitely use white papers. For more on
these questions, see Chapter 4.

As more companies discover the wonders of content marketing, more are
adopting white papers every day. I get frequent queries from people
asking, “Can we use white papers in my business or my sector?” More
often than not, I answer, “Sure!”

OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 2

An Exciting Opportunity for Writers

In This Chapter

[arrow] Understanding the unmet need for white paper writers

[arrow] Breaking into the white papers as a former copywriter,
journalist, or technical writer

[arrow] Landing your first few white paper projects

Do you want to live an independent lifestyle as a freelancer? Make good
money as a writer? Work on interesting projects about leading-edge
topics? Constantly be learning, so you never get bored? Party with
supermodels on your own private island? Oh, whoops, got a little carried
away there. But if you answered “yes!” to the first four questions,
you’ve come to the right place. (You’re on your own with the
supermodels.)

As part of the huge trend of marketing with content, white papers
provide one of the best opportunities to make money as a writer today.
If you master how to create compelling and persuasive white papers, you
can pretty much write your own ticket to fame and fortune. That’s going
to take time and effort, but you’re on the right track by reading this
book. If you apply yourself, you can build an independent copywriting
business with a steady stream of well-paying work in white papers. How
can I say that? Because I’ve done it.

In this chapter, I describe the ample opportunities for any writer who
can create white papers that get results. It comes down to a simple
formula:

High demand + Low supply = A great market for your efforts

This chapter also describes the three most likely paths into white
papers. If you’re an experienced copywriter, journalist, or technical
writer, you have a tremendous background to build on. But no matter what
walk of life you hail from, this chapter lists all the skills you need —
plus a few limiting beliefs and attitudes you may need to forget — to
succeed at writing white papers. Good luck!

Sizing Up the Possibilities

White papers are on the right side of several strong trends in B2B
marketing. Buyers want them, and many competitors have them, so they’ve
become a standard part of the B2B toolkit. White papers have been called
“the king of content” for good reason: They’re the most substantial,
most powerful, most respected form of content in the market today.
They’re riding the immense wave known as content marketing. And the rise
of social media is another huge trend carrying white papers along,
because this form of content can be promoted quite effectively with
social media.

The white paper market is subject to a classic imbalance: a high demand
for white papers but a low supply of writers who know how to create
them. This imbalance has pushed up the rates for writing white papers
and created a tremendous opportunity in this area. If you’re already a
nonfiction writer, redirecting your skills into this area is a smart
move. If you’re not yet a writer but are looking for a good opportunity
to live a more independent lifestyle, there’s a lot of room for you,
too.

In the following sections, I explore the major trends in white papers,
explain why good white paper writers are in short supply, show how much
a white paper writer can earn and how vast this market really is, and
discuss whether white papers are really here to stay.

Looking at three trends pushing white papers to the top

White papers have been booming ever since the web took off in the late
1990s. Today, white papers are an accepted part of B2B marketing, well
funded as a form of inbound marketing, and well suited to promote
through social media. Here, I review three rising trends that have
brought white papers to the very top of the list for how to make money
as a writer today:

[check.png] Trend #1: White papers are expected by B2B buyers. White
papers are highly valued by B2B buyers, especially for technology
products. And these days, a vast range of products have some sort of
technology component, like software, embedded chips, a link to the web,
and so on. Before B2B buyers make a purchase, they want to size up all
their options. Where do they turn for help when making a decision? To
the white papers from each company whose offering is in the running. Any
company that doesn’t have a white paper to promote its product or
service could well be out of the running for that buyer’s business.

[remember.eps] Because so many buyers request white papers, B2B sellers
have to produce them to keep up with competitors. In other words, white
papers are becoming a standard piece in the marketing toolkit for more
and more B2B vendors.

[check.png] Trend #2: White papers are a key part of content marketing.
Content marketing is already booming, and it still has a long way to
grow. Also known as inbound marketing, for years, this side of the
budget has been steadily siphoning dollars away from traditional
outbound activities, like direct mail, telemarketing, trade shows, and
print advertising. And that’s bound to continue for the foreseeable
future. Why? Mainly because inbound marketing can generate a qualified
B2B lead for far less money than outbound marketing. And content
marketing is on the right side of history as the business world moves
away from interruption marketing and toward permission marketing.

[check.png] Trend #3: White papers are rocket fuel for social media.
Social media is most powerful when you have something important to say.
A white paper is the ideal kind of content to promote through social
media because it’s free and easy to access. All you have to do is
publicize the URL to the white paper’s landing page. And if that content
proves useful to those who download it, they can easily “like” it,
retweet it, blog about it, or otherwise share it with their own social
media networks. That’s when your white paper can really catch fire,
blast off, and travel far beyond where any B2B marketing team can send
it.

Understanding why marketers can’t find qualified writers

Many marketing managers want to create white papers to promote their
company’s offerings, but they can’t find anyone to write them. It
happens. A few years ago, I got a call from a marketing manager in New
York City who found me on the web. She was from a little company you may
have heard of: Google. “We have such a hard time finding writers,” she
confided. “I wanted to call and see whether you could help us.” I just
about fell off my chair. I mean, you can’t swing a cat in New York City
without hitting a writer! What she meant, I’ve come to realize, is that
it’s difficult to find writers who can research and produce good B2B
copy about challenging topics, hit their deadlines, and not be prima
donnas who are impossible to work with. By now, I’ve written half a
dozen white papers and close to 20 case studies for Google.

Even the largest, hippest companies are always looking for good writers.
Thousands of marketing managers in B2B companies are searching for
writers who can understand their business and tell their story in a
compelling way — and they’re having trouble finding them. It’s not
really a matter of money; there’s simply a big shortage of skills and
knowledge in this area.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

A quarter million dollars for ten pages: Considering a white paper’s
payoff

Imagine that you’re a salesperson for Acme Scanners, sitting in the
office of an executive who’s thinking about spending a quarter of a
million bucks on your products. “I like what you’re telling me,” he
says. “But I’ll have to run this by my technical team. What kind of
white papers can you send them?”

Gulp. Acme doesn’t have any. “Well, we haven’t . . . um . . . seen the
need to do any white papers,” you start. “Our system is . . . ah . . .
so easy to use that I could offer your IT people a personal demo in . .
. um . . . 60 minutes.” Gulp. You really hope that tiny bead of sweat
doesn’t drip right off your nose and land on his desk.

“No, they hate those,” says your prospect, with a fierce look. “They
really prefer some kind of document they can look at, you know, to size
up every vendor. Don’t you have anything you could send them?”

Gulp. “I’m sure we do,” you manage to croak, watching your fat
commission on the deal fly out the window. “I’ll shake a few trees back
at the office and see what I can come up with for you.” And as soon as
you get out of there, you call up your marketing manager, yelping that
you really need a white paper to close a deal for a quarter million
smackers.

A similar scenario gets played out often. Many B2B buyers demand white
papers to help them decide about making a large purchase. Many competing
companies have them. And that leaves any vendor without them feeling
pressured to keep up. If everyone but Acme sends those IT guys a white
paper or two, what chance does Acme have to make the sale? Acme could be
out of the running. A quarter million dollars lost, all for the sake of
a ten-page document that nobody bothered to write. And if this happens
every month of the year, that’s $3 million a year in sales lost by a
single salesperson for a single company. Multiply that across the entire
B2B marketplace, and you can see the huge payoff for effective white
papers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Calculating the earning potential for a white paper writer

Here’s a question from Economics 101: In a market economy, what happens
when you have high demand for an item but low supply? The answer is, the
price goes up, sometimes way up. That’s why an average white paper
writer can earn $500 a page for creating these documents, and a proven
writer with a good track record can earn considerably more. That’s
right: You can earn up to $1,000 a page writing a white paper if you’re
really good. And if you work efficiently, that translates into hundreds
of dollars an hour.

Why would companies fork over that much money? Because they know that a
white paper, done correctly, pays for itself many times over. They know
they can likely use a good white paper for a year or two and spread that
fee across many hundreds or thousands of downloads and many dozens or
hundreds of leads generated. That makes $1,000 a page a sensible
investment.

But don’t take my word for it. Consider the informed sources shown in
Table 2-1: executives from the content networks KnowledgeStorm and
TechTarget, the latest survey of white paper writers from 2007, the
leading training center for copywriters, AWAI, and the leading market
directory for freelance writers, Writer’s Market. According to all these
sources, the average fees for writing an average-sized white paper range
from just over $3,000 to almost $5,000.

[Fees for Writing a 7- to 10-Page White Paper]

Beyond what you see in Table 2-1, the white paper writers’ survey showed
that one in four white paper writers charges between $5,000 and $10,000
for a single paper. My conclusion: A typical white paper for a
reasonably big company, done by a reasonably experienced writer, costs
about $5,000 today. And the more experienced the writer, the more he can
charge.

Using these numbers, I created three earning scenarios for white paper
writers: A beginner who works slowly but diligently can likely do 12 to
15 white papers for $3,000 each to gross around $40,000 a year. At the
other end of the scale, a proven white paper expert who charges $6,000 a
project and works quickly can probably complete 30 projects to gross
about $180,000 a year. And an intermediate writer can come in somewhere
in the middle, probably topping $100,000 a year. Of course, these are
back-of-the-envelope calculations, and your mileage may vary. For
details, see Chapter 4.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

How many white papers are published?

Sometimes an earnest writer thinking about going out on his own or a
marketing person working on a business plan asks me, “How many white
papers get published every year?” Honestly, I don’t know, and I don’t
think anyone else knows, either. No one tracks this number; that would
be like tracking how many press releases or B2B case studies are
published every year. What’s the point?

With some digging, you could come up with a few data points, like how
many white papers are syndicated every year with the main services like
KnowledgeStorm and TechTarget. But then what — multiply that number by
10, 20, 50, or 100 to cover all the white papers that aren’t syndicated?

If I had to guess, I would venture that scores of thousands of white
papers are published every year. And that number is growing. But instead
of trying to put a precise figure on it, here’s a better way to look at
this: More B2B companies are looking for good writers than you and I and
all the other readers of this book will ever be able to uncover if we
spend the rest of our lives trying. And you can put that in your
business plan, and tell them I said so.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Discovering who uses white papers

A common market-sizing question that often pops up is, “How many
companies need white papers anyway?” I did some market research into
this a few years ago, and then updated that just before this book went
to press. Table 2-2 shows what I found, based on the latest available
data.

[The Size of the White Paper Market]

In the column labeled Domain, Equipment Manufacturers includes any
company making computers, peripherals, medical devices — you know,
hardware — but not household appliances, cars or trucks, smaller boats,
lawn equipment, or lighting. Scientific and Technical Service Providers
includes any company doing technical consulting, measuring, or testing
(but not accounting, advertising, interior design, landscaping, or law
firms). Software and Information Providers includes anyone publishing
apps, databases, or syndicated media. I’ve done white papers for
companies in all three domains from all over the world.

The column labeled NAISC Codes lists the North American Industry
Classification System codes I counted or excluded under each domain.
Only firms with employees are included; I didn’t count a self-employed
person or couple, because these tiny businesses don’t often hire a white
paper writer.

The column labeled Number of Companies shows how many companies existed
in each domain in the United States at the time of the 2008 census. I
took the comparative GDP for several other countries that do business in
English to bump up the American numbers by about one-third for a global
total.

As you can see from the table, well more than half a million companies
in the English-speaking world could use white papers. And that’s
counting only the science- or technology-driven sectors where white
papers are an established tradition. Many other sectors could benefit
from white papers, too.

Wondering whether the white paper opportunity will last

Some people accept that a lot of companies use white papers today, but
they worry about the future. Won’t something else come along to replace
them? What about video? How long will this wonderful market opportunity
last? Don’t worry. If you can help a B2B company describe some
relatively new, complex, and expensive offering in compelling terms,
you’ll never be short of work. If you polish your skills so you can dig
up and present useful information to help a B2B buyer understand an
issue, solve a problem, or make a decision, you’ll never be short of
work. To see why, consider these points:

[check.png] White papers have already stood the test of time. The white
paper has existed as a useful format for more than 100 years now.
Originally, white papers were short, factual reports and policy papers
from the U.K. government. Many of these reports covered industries, and
as business people began to see them, their popularity grew. Executives
liked the authoritative voice and vast sweep of research in these
documents, so businesses began to imitate the same format and issue
white papers of their own.

Since then, white papers have become a standard tool in the B2B
marketer’s toolkit. These documents are incredibly useful for building
recognition for a company or product, generating leads at the top of the
sales funnel, nurturing prospects through the middle of the funnel, and
supporting technical evaluations at the bottom of the funnel. Do you
imagine that any companies will still need to do those things in the
future? I do.

[check.png] White papers provide the latest and greatest information.
Today’s white papers are ideal for describing any B2B offering that’s
relatively new, complex, or expensive. Do you suppose any B2B offerings
of tomorrow will involve new breakthroughs that take some explaining?
Certainly. Do you think next year’s B2B products and services will be
remarkably simpler and cheaper than what’s on the market today? Perhaps,
but only if they involve some sort of breakthrough that takes some
explaining. So any way you look at this, vendors will need a persuasive
and thoughtful way to publish their latest information for B2B buyers.

[check.png] White papers contain information that business people seek.
An effective white paper can help a B2B buyer understand an issue, solve
a problem, or make a decision. Do you suppose business people will still
have issues, problems, or decisions to make in the future? I do. And do
you suppose that watching a video will ever be as effective as reading
and thinking? Some people believe that. But here’s the kicker: Who do
you think writes the script and often directs the entire production for
a video? That would be the writer who understands the content, probably
because he already wrote the white paper about it.

[remember.eps] Any way I look at this issue, I come to the same
conclusion: The white paper market is going to be healthy for a long
time. And even if some new media forms eventually come along to replace
it, the skills you develop writing white papers will be transferable to
these new media. See Chapter 3 for a longer discussion on the past,
present, and likely future of white papers.

Coming into White Papers from Three Common Paths

Most of the white paper writers I’ve met entered the field by accident.
No one goes off to college thinking, “I’m going to graduate and become a
white paper writer!” No degree exists for white papers anyway. The most
useful courses you can study are all over the map, perhaps a smattering
of computer science, English, history, marketing, philosophy, rhetoric,
sociology, and any of the sciences that you’re curious about.

But the white papers writers I know do have a few things in common. For
one, they’re all accomplished communicators who enjoy building an
argument with facts and logic. For another, many have worked in a few
similar roles. In fact, the three most common careers people work in
before they start writing white papers are copywriters, journalists, and
technical writers.

Depending on the path you’ve traveled so far, you’ve likely developed
some great skills that can help you succeed in this field. You may have
some areas where you need to pick up some new skills. And you may have
to get rid of some unhealthy attitudes that won’t serve you well as a
white paper writer. If you come from one of these paths, flip through
the rest of this chapter to find the section that fits you best.

How do I know so much about these fields? Well, I spent many years
working in each one. As a freelance journalist, I wrote close to 1,000
magazine articles for everyone from accountants to woodworkers. I worked
full time and then on contract as a technical writer for more years than
I care to remember, producing software manuals and online help. Most
recently, I’ve worked as an independent B2B copywriter since the late
1990s. And I’ve won awards for writing in all three domains. So if you
come from any of these domains, I’ve walked a mile in your shoes.

If you don't have experience as a copywriter, journalist, or technical
writer, don't worry. No matter what other jobs you've held, if you can
present a compelling argument backed up by solid evidence, you can
figure out everything else you need to know to succeed in writing white
papers. For tips on researching and writing white papers, see Chapters
14 and 15, and use the index to find specific notes on these skills.
Also see the many free articles available on my website at
www.thatwhitepaperguy.com/articles.html.

Copywriters and white papers

If you’ve worked as a copywriter, you probably understand more about
marketing than people from any other career path. You may have seen
content marketing in action. You already know how to do research,
interview experts, write smoothly, and meet short deadlines. You can
follow a house style guide and handle reviews and comments. So you
already have some wonderful skills you can apply to this field.

But you’ll need to develop some new skills, and you’ll need to erase a
few attitudes that could hurt your white paper writing. Above all,
you’ll have to master writing to persuade by using facts and logic
rather than appeals to emotion as in business-to-consumer (B2C)
copywriting. And you must master how to write to explain an issue or
prove useful information, without selling anything. These challenges
aren’t insurmountable. But whenever you sit down to write, your habits
from the past may tempt you to gloss over any holes in your evidence
with glib statements and fluffy promises rather than solid facts and
arguments. If you can get past that, you can have a wonderful future as
a white paper writer.

Table 2-3 shows the skills you likely have as a copywriter and those you
may need to work on.

Table 2-3 Copywriting Skills and White Papers

  ---------------------------------- -----------------------------------------
  Skills You Already Have            Skills You May Need to Develop
  Analyzing an audience              Writing to explain
  Doing in-depth research            Handling quotes and sources
  Understanding why B2B buyers buy   Proving all your claims with evidence
  Interviewing experts               Formatting documents for quick scanning
  Writing to persuade                Telling an engaging story
  Following house style              
  Meeting short deadlines            
  Handling reviews and comments      
  ---------------------------------- -----------------------------------------

Most copywriters have a few things drummed into their heads at college,
on the job, and in bull sessions with colleagues. Here are some habits
you may need to rethink to succeed in white papers.

Appeal to logic, not emotions

The best copywriting calls to the consumers’ emotions, making them ache
for the product you’re describing. This kind of writing paints a
detailed vision of all the wonderful benefits people will enjoy after
they buy. Great copy holds out the promise of things like stunning
beauty, radiant health, untold wealth, and a lifetime of leisure.

White papers are different. They’re not directed at consumers buying
shampoo, vitamins, or chewing gum. They’re directed at people making a
serious business decision worth a lot of money. In a white paper, you
write mainly to explain. And when you do persuade, you use facts and
logical arguments, not appeals to emotion. White papers are in the same
league as press releases and annual reports. These business documents
are expected to deliver facts and arguments, not fluff and pipe dreams.
So copywriters need to tone down the adjectives, superlatives, promises,
and emotional appeals. If you can’t do that, you won’t last long as a
white paper writer.

[remember.eps] I’m not saying business buyers are heartless automatons
with no feelings. But few business people can afford to spend millions
of dollars on impulse or because they heard a cute jingle on the radio.
They buy because they’re convinced that a vendor has something that will
help their company make money, save money, beat the competition, or
serve their customers better. Nothing else really matters. So drop the
calls to emotion, stick to the facts, and everyone will be happier.

Sell the steak, not the sizzle

A copywriter must give his work pizzazz. Any successful ad, brochure,
jingle, or sales letter needs to be snappy to make an impression. But
white papers are different. They’re serious business documents that
should be dignified and helpful, not packed with zest and zing. To write
an effective white paper, tone down the hype, delete all the fluffy
adjectives, and abandon the worn-out gambit of “selling the sizzle.” In
fact, you could say that a white paper needs to work much harder than
that. It needs to set the table, present the menu, suggest a good wine,
deliver a fabulous meal, bring coffee and dessert, and then give the
reader a coupon to bring them back for another visit. That’s more than
just a little sizzle.

Talk features, not benefits

When writing copy, you’re supposed to link every feature to the benefits
it delivers. You don’t often have to describe how anything works, just
how much better people’s lives will be after they buy it. You can sketch
in a few highlights or cherry-pick the most appealing features to touch
on as you build to your stirring conclusion — buy now!

In a white paper, you may need to spend most of your text describing how
some feature is implemented. Maybe the product uses a completely new
approach to solve an age-old problem. Maybe its materials are more
durable, or its algorithms more precise. Many readers download a white
paper specifically to discover the technical details about a company’s
offerings. They want to understand the nitty-gritty about each key
feature. So skimming over the features and focusing on the benefits
often isn’t enough.

Don’t ask for the order

Copywriting is often defined as “salesmanship in print.” But this
definition is dangerous for a white paper writer. You never “ask for the
order” in a white paper. These documents are used for complex B2B sales,
where numerous people come together to make a weighty decision. This
decision can take weeks or months to complete. Your goal in a white
paper is to provide useful content that positions your company as a
trusted advisor and engages prospects for the long haul. At the end of
the document, you encourage readers to take the next step in the sales
cycle, something like visiting a website to use an online ROI
calculator. You seldom ask readers to pick up the phone and call
customer service to place an order.

[warning_bomb.eps] In fact, the number-one mistake too many writers make
in too many white papers is too much selling. White paper readers aren’t
looking for a sales pitch. They’re looking for useful information to
help them understand an issue, solve a problem, or make a decision. If
you make your white paper a thinly veiled sales pitch, you’ll distort
its purpose, confound your readers’ expectations, and perhaps turn off
your prospect permanently. By pushing for the sale too hard in a white
paper, you can lose the sale.

Journalists and white papers

If you’ve worked as a journalist, you likely have the makings of a great
white paper writer. You already know how to write fast, write well, and
tell a compelling story to a specific audience. You’re used to
interviewing and making a quick study of new material. You can sift
through a 50-page report and come up with a few choice nuggets and
quotable quotes.

Here’s how U.K. brand journalist Ashley Curtis explains the value of a
journalism background:

Delivering engaging, interesting, and relevant content is the beating
heart of content marketing, a focus that journalists can identify with.
. . . Journalism by nature involves tracking the latest events happening
in a particular industry, so firms hiring a professional journalist know
they’re going to get a return on their investment in the form of highly
developed writing skills, engaging written content, and an eye for a
story.

So you certainly do have some fabulous skills to apply to this field.
You’ll probably have to pick up a few new things and drop negative
attitudes that could hurt your white paper writing. But all in all, as a
trained journalist, you have better-than-average chances of success in
white papers. Table 2-4 outlines the skills you likely have as a
journalist and those you may need to work on.

Table 2-4 Journalism Skills and White Papers

  --------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------
  Skills You Already Have                 Skills You May Need to Develop
  Understanding an audience               Analyzing an audience
  Doing quick research                    Understanding why B2B buyers buy
  Interviewing experts                    Doing in-depth research
  Telling a story                         Writing to persuade
  Handling quotes and sources             Formatting documents for quick scanning
  Meeting deadlines                       Handling reviews and comments
  Writing in a concise and lively style   Parking your ego (you’ll never get a byline for a white paper)
  Following house style                   
  Working with an editor                  
  --------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------

Most journalists have a few things drummed into their heads at college,
on the job, and in bull sessions with colleagues. Here are some
self-limiting beliefs you may need to rethink to succeed in white
papers.

Marketing isn’t evil; it’s essential

Saying “marketing is evil” makes about as much sense as saying
“breathing is evil.” When a company makes something, how is the rest of
the world supposed to know it exists? That’s marketing. Journalism has
been supported by marketing, in the form of advertising, for the past
175 years. The recent bloodbath — in which close to 50,000 newspaper
people have been laid off in the United States alone — happened for one
simple reason: Advertising dollars moved from newspapers to the web. If
you ever worked as a journalist, your job was propped up by marketing.
Sure, some marketers are dishonest, and some ads are misleading. But
some journalists make up their sources and some fabricate their stories.
The failings of a few don’t make both fields entirely corrupt. So get
over yourself. Get rid of this attitude, or you can forget about writing
white papers.

Forget both sides of the story; tell your client’s story

Journalists are supposed to get both sides of the story, which results
in a lot of phrases like “on the other hand . . .” or “but critics say .
. .” that are designed to inject the opposite point of view. It doesn’t
matter whether that view is that dinosaur bones are only 6,000 years old
or that global warming is a myth. No matter what you think about
objectivity in journalism, it doesn’t exist when you’re writing to
persuade. In a white paper, there’s only one side of the story: your
client’s. In a problem/solution flavor of white paper (see Chapter 8),
the other side of the story sums up every other attempt to solve a
problem and the failings of each attempt. You never write “on the other
hand . . .” in a white paper, so get out of that habit.

You’re not in a race; get it right the first time

Journalism is a constant race to see who breaks the story first, which
can lead to shoddy work, where fraudulent tweets or media hoaxes are
picked up without being checked out. But you don’t have a second edition
of a white paper. You have to get it right the first time. Speed isn’t
the most important thing; explaining and persuading with facts and logic
is your top priority. Don’t rush out a white paper like it’s front-page
news. Take your time, check and recheck your sources and build a
thoughtful piece that gets results. Yes, you can always upload a
corrected version of a white paper, but any B2B buyers who saw your
first edition with mistakes in it have already formed a poor impression
of your company that you can’t easily repair.

Technical writers and white papers

If you worked as a technical writer, you’ve probably seen a few white
papers in your time. You may have reviewed or even written some
yourself. You’ve interviewed technical experts and business executives
and handled their comments and reviews tactfully. You already know how
to write precisely and explain how things work. You know how to work
smoothly in a team. You’ve mastered the software you use for publishing,
so you can design pages, insert graphics, and use text enhancements like
tables and headings. And to top off everything else, you have experience
in the kind of technology-driven firms that make up the ideal market for
white papers.

Although you can apply all these fabulous skills to this field, you’ll
probably have to figure out a few new things and lose a few negative
attitudes that could hurt your white paper writing. In particular, you
must let go of the fierce restraints imposed on every tech writer. Don’t
be afraid to be more passionate, opinionated, and forceful in your
writing. Writing to persuade demands all of that. If you can break free
from these constraints, your background gives you a good chance of
success.

Table 2-5 lists the skills you likely have as a technical writer and
those you may need to work on.

Table 2-5 Technical Writing Skills and White Papers

  ------------------------------------------ ----------------------------------
  Skill You Already Have                     Skills You May Need to Develop
  Analyzing an audience                      Understanding why B2B buyers buy
  Interviewing subject matter experts        Doing in-depth research
  Writing to explain                         Handling quotes and sources
  Following house style                      Telling a story
  Mastering software for publishing          Writing to persuade
  Formatting documents for quick reference   Meeting shorter deadlines
  Handling reviews and comments              
  ------------------------------------------ ----------------------------------

Most tech writers have a few things drummed into their heads at college,
on the job, and in bull sessions with colleagues. Here are some things
you may need to rethink to succeed in white papers.

Sales and marketing aren’t “the dark side”

Tech writers often encounter mistrust of sales, marketing, and business
in general from the engineers and scientists they rub shoulders with.
Moving from R&D or engineering into marketing is called “going over to
the dark side.” Marketing people are called suits or even weasels. What
the name-callers forget is that without sales, no company would have the
money to pay their salaries. Without marketing, no one would know about
the wonderful products they’re building. So if you ever worked as a
technical writer, your job depended on sales and marketing to bring in
the customers.

And another thing: When you write a white paper, no one is going to ask
you to lie, cheat, or steal. You won’t be writing breathless
infomercials (“How much would you expect to pay?”) or ditzy sales
letters (“Act now: This limited-time offer is available only to the
first 250 buyers!”) In fact, part of your job as a white paper writer is
to resist plunking the same old sales pitch or marketing speak into your
document. Does that sound like “selling out”? Banish this attitude from
your mind, or there’s no point trying to write white papers.

You must let your voice be heard

Did you ever try to use a striking turn of phrase or a lighter tone in a
technical manual? Or point out that one feature was superior to another?
I bet you were slapped down like a misbehaving child. Then you got a
lecture on how a tech writer must be invisible, neutral, detached, and
unemotional; a veritable Spock of the writing world.

But white papers are different. You may need to write about an industry
challenge or tell a story about people in a place with a problem. To
write in a compelling way, you must take a reasoned but passionate
stand. You must express your position forcefully and eloquently. You
must take off the tech-writing muzzle and find your voice. If you can’t,
your white papers may sound too cold and unpersuasive and may not get
the results you need.

White papers require both content and style

As a technical writer, your success depends on writing effectively about
“things.” This involves explaining how to use a product to perform a
task or accomplish a goal. Conveying that content accurately is your top
priority. How well you express it is much less important. As you know,
most documentation follows a house style that determines everything,
from your headings to nomenclature to your choice of tenses and
pronouns.

But white papers are different. Yes, you need to keep your facts
straight, but no style guide can tell you how to express those facts.
And because you’re writing to persuade, an effective white paper must
get the argument exactly right. That means backing up all your
assertions with proof. I bet you never had to do that in any technical
manual. And you must rewrite and polish like never before. One draft or
two for technical accuracy won’t be enough. You must labor over your
words to craft a message that explains and persuades. You must control
your material and build a convincing case. You must ignore many of the
confines you’re used to from writing documentation. In short, you must
let your style take flight in a way you never could in any technical
manual. If you’re up for that, you can do very well writing white
papers.

Finding White Paper Clients

Suppose by now you’re convinced that the opportunity is there, you’re
excited about the earning potential, you’ve studied up on white papers,
and you’re all set to take on your first project. The only question is:
Where do you find a white paper client?

Whole books have been written on how to start up and develop a freelance
writing business, so I'm not going to try to repeat all that advice
here. Some especially good books are The Wealthy Freelancer (Alpha), The
Six-Figure Freelancer (Paul Lima Presents), and The Well-Fed Writer
(Fanove Publishing). All three have fantastic advice about analyzing
your knowledge, approaching clients, and making money. Three excellent
online resources aimed specifically at individual freelancers who may
not enjoy selling are Get Clients Now! (www.getclientsnow.com), Action
Plan Marketing (www.actionplan.com), and the International Freelancers
Academy (www.internationalfreelancersacademy.com). All three online
resources have e-newsletters, online courses and webinars, and pages
with lots of helpful advice.

In the following sections, I give you a couple of pointers on what to do
and what not to do to get a potential client’s attention, and then I
offer some insights on how to keep your business healthy and thriving.

Avoid most of what you hear

A lot of the marketing advice you hear isn’t useful to you. Most “small
business” marketing advisors think “small” means 50 employees. They tell
you to set up a website and grow your online presence. Join groups on
LinkedIn and extend your network. Tweet useful items and gain followers
with Twitter. Put up a company page on Facebook and get people to like
you. Publish an e-newsletter and get subscribers. Go to your local
Chamber of Commerce meeting, network, and pass out business cards. Don’t
forget to send out hundreds of direct mail letters. And e-mail — you’ve
got to be doing warm prospecting with e-mail.

Use the web. Use social media. Use networking. Use direct mail. Use
e-mail. Will everyone puleeeze give it a rest! Don’t buy into the hype
from all these hair-on-fire, running-off-in-all-directions-at-once
marketing-ninja types who think they’re advising some sort of corporate
enterprise. An independent writer is a one-person microbusiness, not
Acme Scanners. You can only do so much, so anything you do to market
yourself has to be completely strategic, as described in the next
section.

Getting started with the basics

Of course, you need a basic website and LinkedIn presence so a potential
client takes you seriously. It helps to have a few sample white papers
that you’ve already completed. Just as no one wants to be the first
person a surgeon ever operates on, no one wants to be the first person
you ever write a white paper for. Aside from that, finding white paper
clients is no different than finding clients who need any copywriter,
social media expert, designer, photographer, or other creative supplier.

To find prospective clients, focus on the three factors that help you
determine whether a company can use your services: Does the company sell
anything relatively new, complex, or expensive? You know your own
background, and where you have domain knowledge you can draw on, what
you find interesting, and what industries leave you completely cold. And
you likely have some companies you’d love to write for. So make a list,
and get busy.

One great place to find leads is Jigsaw (www.jigsaw.com), a huge online
Rolodex of contacts. If you know a company name, odds are you can find
the name, phone number, and direct e-mail of any marketing manager there
through a quick search. You can pay a few dollars a month to get
contacts throughout the year, or upload your own contacts, or correct
existing listings to earn points you can redeem for contacts.

[tip.eps] The absolute fastest way to check out a potential white paper
client is to simply call the company, and ask “Who’s responsible for
doing your white papers?” In a call or two, you’ll be routed to, most
likely, a hardworking marketing manager who will be busy but probably
delighted to speak to you. After all, he can’t find good writers,
remember? Just start off the call by saying you’re a white paper writer
who knows the industry. That will get his attention.

[warning_bomb.eps] If you want to make it as a writer, don’t get sucked
into time sinks like Facebook, YouTube, or forums for sad-sack writers
who never land any clients. That may feel like work; after all, you’re
sitting at your computer doing “research” and building your network, but
you’re not accomplishing much. At least, hang out on LinkedIn and look
for marketing managers who may hire you, or read websites and blogs
about white papers to build your knowledge.

The secret of freelance success

Here’s the secret I’ve learned from more than 25 years of
self-employment: Find a good client that you enjoy working with, get
paid fairly, and do such a good job that he hires you to do it again —
and he tell his colleagues about you. Then do it all over again. You’ll
soon have more work than you can handle. You’ll have loyal clients who
will stick with you for years and even put their projects on hold until
you’re free to work with them. That’s freelance success, regardless of
whether you ever send out a single tweet.

Consider this: A recent survey of close to 1,500 freelancers revealed
that their top three ways of getting clients were referrals, word of
mouth, and tapping their network. All three tactics go back to the basic
principles of freelancing: Do a great job every time, and you’ll get
repeat business from the same clients, word-of-mouth referrals when
happy clients tell their colleagues and peers about you, and an
expanding network that brings you more opportunities all the time.

OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 3

The Past, Present, and Future of White Papers

In This Chapter

[arrow] Discovering where white papers began in the early 20th century

[arrow] Understanding how technology forced white papers to evolve

[arrow] Seeing where white papers are today

[arrow] Discussing the technologies forcing white papers to evolve,
again

“If you would understand anything, observe its beginning and its
development,” said Aristotle. In other words, to help understand the
present, study the past. This statement certainly applies to white
papers. Tracing the past history and evolution of these documents gives
us a better understanding of their current formats and likely futures.

In this chapter, I give you a brief overview of the past, present, and
likely future of white papers. I look at where white papers originated
more than 100 years ago, where they are today, and the most likely four
paths they could take in the future. This chapter defines three distinct
generations of white papers: Generation 1.0 for the past, 2.0 for the
present, and 3.0 for the future. Table 3-1 shows the key features of
each generation, and the rest of this chapter discusses each generation
in detail.

[Three Generations of White Papers]

Where It All Began: Generation 1.0 (1910s to 1990s)

The white paper first began in the United Kingdom early in the 20th
century. Printed by Her Majesty’s Stationery Office, these white papers
were shorter reports or position papers named for the color of their
white covers, distinguishing them from the much longer reports and
policy books bound with blue covers. All these early white papers were
formatted with basic typesetting, including bold headings, italic for
subheads, and occasional tables.

This format spread from government to business, remaining virtually
unchanged for most of the 20th century. In the following sections, I
break down the characteristics of the Generation 1.0 white paper and
explore a comparable model.

Characteristics of Gen 1.0 white papers

Completely dry and factual, Generation 1.0 white papers set the standard
for decades to come. Gradually moving beyond politics, white papers
explained advances in science and technology during the decades leading
up to World War II and then the 1950s and ’60s. With the rise of the
personal computer in the 1970s and ’80s, white papers became especially
popular in information technology, a sector that creates a steady stream
of developments that must be explained to potential buyers.

These text-only Generation 1.0 documents were intended to be read on
paper. Although fairly inexpensive to produce, they looked bland, with
limited typography, no graphics, and no color. Such unexciting
formatting helped confine these documents to a narrow range of technical
subjects aimed at B2B engineering-type readers. You can consider the
text-only, Generation 1.0 white paper as your grandfather’s white paper,
now retired and over the hill. But for many years, these documents
provided information that helped countless decision makers understand an
issue, solve a problem, or make a decision.

Because integrating graphics into documents was so difficult and costly,
most white papers looked more or less the same for many years: one
column of unadorned text set in a single typeface. Every page was a wall
of gray, occasionally relieved by a table.

Any marketing piece that needed better production — such as a glossy
brochure — was done by outside suppliers who used typesetting,
silver-based photography, manual design and page makeup, and offset
printing. All of this was too costly and time-consuming to justify for
most white papers.

The closest model: Business reports

The closest model for a Generation 1.0 white paper is an internal
business report. With a bland cover, a wide line of typewritten text in
a single typeface, and a complete lack of graphics or photos, the
classic business report of the 1920s didn’t change for decades. Even
though word processing had been on the scene since the 1970s, it was
still a text-only world. No stand-alone word-processing systems or the
PC software that replaced them could incorporate graphics until the
1980s.

If you find this hard to believe, remember that many of the technologies
everyone takes for granted today — PC-compatible laser and inkjet
printers, desktop scanners, and digital cameras — weren’t available
until the mid-1980s or 1990s. Earlier versions of some of these devices
existed, but they didn’t fit on a desktop or work with a PC. By now, all
these technologies offer powerful specs at a fraction of the original
cost and are must-have tools for producing a white paper.

Forcing White Papers to Evolve

Late in the 20th century, several advances in technology combined to
raise expectations for B2B communication and forced white papers to
evolve. The first was desktop publishing, ushered in with the arrival of
the Apple Macintosh in 1984. Desktop publishing put powerful editorial
and design tools into the hands of regular business people, enabling
anyone with a little training to accomplish these three things more
easily and at a lower cost than ever:

[check.png] Use different typefaces of different sizes in a document.

[check.png] Mix text and graphics on the same page.

[check.png] Design pages on-screen that print out more or less the same
on paper.

Over the next few years, the impact of desktop publishing was profound,
sweeping through the business world and turning traditional print
production upside down. Within ten years, by the mid-1990s, the expected
standards for written communication in every organization were elevated
dramatically. Your grandfather’s business report was a thing of the
past, along with your grandfather’s white paper. Even inexpensive
marketing materials like fliers gained far higher production values.

But that was only the beginning. Some other key technologies followed:

[check.png] Starting in 1991 with HTML and in 1993 with the Mosaic
browser, the World Wide Web became an instant, global distribution
channel.

[check.png] In 1993, Adobe’s Portable Document Format (PDF) was
released. This universal file format saved the design and typography of
a document in a format that anyone could view with a free reader.

[check.png] Starting in 1998, Google’s search engine became the best way
to find relevant content on the web.

All these technologies together caused an incredible shift. B2B
marketers could now publish attractive documents in-house for low cost,
freeing vendors from the expense and delay of printing and shipping
their content. B2B prospects could search for white papers and download
them by themselves, freeing them from the delay of getting content
through the mail or the hassle of dealing with a salesperson. These
innovations created fertile ground where a whole new generation of white
papers could spring up: Generation 2.0.

Where White Papers Are Now: Generation 2.0 (1990s to Today)

The white paper really came into its own as a B2B marketing piece in the
1990s. But a bland, text-only, Generation 1.0 document was no longer
enough to engage decision makers. Driven both by technology and the
changing marketplace, these documents evolved into Generation 2.0. In
the following sections, I discuss this generation’s characteristics, two
close models, and its ongoing relevancy in today’s market.

Characteristics of Gen 2.0 white papers

Generation 2.0 white papers are marked by good typography, frequent
graphics, and more attractive page design. Color often appears on every
page, used in company branding, graphics, or text enhancements like
shaded text boxes. These documents are designed to be read either on
paper or on-screen.

Having higher production values than Generation 1.0 white papers helped
Generation 2.0 emerge as the ultimate expression of many companies’
content marketing. This new, improved format suits the ongoing
information overload of most executives, who have too much to do, too
much to remember, and too much to think about to tolerate a text-only
document.

The only downside? Generation 2.0 white papers are harder to produce,
and they often require a separate pass through the hands of a
professional designer. And although the white paper as a six- to
eight-page document is tolerable for today’s B2B decision makers, this
length may present too much reading for younger audiences, who tend to
prefer video and interacting with peers. You should consider the
Generation 2.0 document your father’s white paper, still in service
today, but already with an eye on retirement.

Two close models: Annual reports and science magazines

For all its advances, a Generation 2.0 white paper is still a text-based
document. Although the text is adorned with good typography, graphics,
and color, all assembled into highly readable pages, this generation is
still firmly rooted in printed documents. To help you understand
Generation 2.0 white papers, I present two of the closest parallels in
the following sections: annual reports and science magazines.

Annual reports

For many years, the front part of any public company’s annual report
showcased that organization’s products, services, management, and
employees. With a lot of pictures, exquisite design, and carefully
crafted text, these documents aim to inform and persuade — to inform
readers about the company and its most recent results, and to persuade
shareholders to hold onto their shares and even buy more. In this sense,
an annual report has the same purpose as a white paper: to inform and
persuade, using facts and logical arguments. These annual reports make a
natural model for writers and designers who want to study how a
Generation 2.0 white paper should look and sound.

Science magazines

Any well-designed magazine for popular science, computers, or
photography — or any serious hobby like amateur astronomy — can be a
good model for a Generation 2.0 white paper. In this case, the intent is
most often to inform, not to persuade. But even this type of magazine
may run editorials, columns, or product reviews that get pretty
opinionated. Look at how the text and graphics are integrated and how
they support one another. Study how the captions are written and how the
articles refer to the supporting graphics. A magazine like Popular
Science or Scientific American can be an excellent model for blending
text and graphics in a highly readable format.

But aren’t white papers old-fashioned?

The rise of social media, like Facebook and Twitter, gives many
marketers pause as they struggle to integrate these new channels into
their marketing mix. Fans of social media are nothing if not noisy.
Every week another thousand blogs shout out that every company must use
every social media channel or else risk going under. “Maybe white papers
are too old-fashioned,” some marketers wonder. “Maybe we should forget
about those and focus on getting ‘likes’ and followers.”

This barrage of noise about social media can drown out the fact that
these new channels align perfectly with marketing with content. To be
engaging, social media needs compelling content, not just mindless
chitchat. What are you going to tweet about anyway — the weather? What
your CEO had for lunch? Or the useful ideas in your latest white paper?

It’s true that white papers are built around narrative text, and not
everyone likes to read. For example, a lot of young people would rather
use their smartphones or watch videos than do something that reminds
them of school. Sorry to tell you, but work isn’t always “fun.” Often
people on the job have to do things that aren’t their top choice for
having fun. And when your company is making a major decision to buy
something that’s relatively new, complicated, and expensive, you’d
better believe your executives want something to read — something more
substantial than 140 characters.

Yes, white papers are old-fashioned. So is designing a good product and
selling it for a fair price. So is telling the truth and taking
responsibility for your own life. A vast difference exists between being
old-fashioned and being over the hill. White papers have tremendous
staying power. After all, they’ve proven effective at informing and
persuading for more than a century. Where will Twitter and Facebook be
in 100 years?

Still evolving, not dying

Like everything else, white papers will continue to evolve along with
our culture, demographics, and technology. One thing I’m sure about:
Narrative text that helps business people solve a problem, understand an
issue, or make a decision will continue to be valued for many years to
come. And if this narrative is packaged in a slightly different way, so
what?

The evolution from Generation 1.0 to 2.0 white papers — although it
called for new skills that weren’t needed before — helped deliver B2B
messages in a more effective way that appealed to the audience of the
day. By the same token, the evolution from Generation 2.0 to Generation
3.0 white papers, which is now underway, will call for new skills that
weren’t needed in the past. But with the right content, the right
skills, and the right media, this evolution should help create B2B
content that’s even more engaging, more compelling, and more persuasive
to the audiences of the future.

Where White Papers Are Going: Generation 3.0 (Coming Soon)

Remember that idea about studying history to help understand the present
and predict the future? History teaches a significant lesson about white
papers. As technology makes using media like animation, audio, and video
faster, easier, and more affordable, readers expect to see these new
media in B2B marketing.

To stay engaging and relevant for tomorrow’s audiences, white papers
must encompass these new elements and evolve to Generation 3.0. Paper
will fade away, and newer materials will be designed for reading and
interacting on-screen. Retaining text but adding multimedia and
interaction should help engage audiences of all ages. You can consider
Generation 3.0 white papers as the new kid on the block: He’s full of
promise but still has to prove his reputation.

In the following sections, I discuss how white papers continue to evolve
and four likely paths they may follow in the future.

Some trends to watch

Business people now have simple, inexpensive tools for creating audio
and video content, posting it for distribution, and promoting it
quickly. For example, inexpensive MP3 recorders can pick up
conversations anywhere inside or out. Software like Audacity
(downloadable from www.audacity.sourceforge.net) provides powerful
audio-editing tools for no cost. Both Apple and Microsoft offer free
video editors, iMovie and Windows Movie Maker. Individuals who know how
to use these new tools can now record video with a smartphone, edit it
on a laptop, post it to YouTube, and promote it around the world through
social media, all within a few hours.

Of course, the web is all about linking to other information, sometimes
drilling through numerous layers to arrive at a more complete
understanding, as well as interacting with peers, colleagues, and
experts. Marketers need to consider these interactive elements for
future white papers.

Another huge trend is the use of mobile devices that are always on and
always connected to the web. Many of the so-called Millennial
Generation, born after 1985, have grown up with “the web in their
pocket,” constantly accessing new media through their ever-present
devices. As members of this cohort become more influential and
ultimately become decision makers, B2B marketing must provide this
audience with the content they need in the format they prefer.

[warning_bomb.eps] One likely downside of Generation 3.0 white papers is
how difficult and costly they’ll be to produce. And unless multimedia
elements are used with taste and restraint, they could end up
distracting viewers from the key messages of the entire piece.

Four possible paths to the future

Gazing into my crystal ball, I glimpse a spindly black tree with four
spindly branches sticking out in different directions. Each branch
points to a hazy pathway through the dark and dangerous woods. Ah, these
must indicate the four possible paths that Generation 3.0 white papers
can take in the future:

[check.png] Multimedia PDFs

[check.png] Microsites built around a white paper

[check.png] Infographics with layered content

[check.png] Mobile apps

In the rest of this section, I share notes on each possibility. For more
discussion and examples of Generation 3.0 white papers, visit
www.thatwhitepaperguy.com/the-future-of-white-papers.html.

Multimedia PDFs

The first and most likely path to Generation 3.0 is a multimedia PDF.
This builds on the current model of the white paper as a document,
adding further media, such as animation, audio, video, and
interactivity. All this content is contained in a multimedia PDF driven
by narrative text. The current version of the free Adobe Reader supports
a multimedia PDF, and some B2B vendors are now creating this type of
document.

For example, check out the white paper from Eccolo Media called "Five
Cost-Effective Ways to Create More Interactive Content" available at
www.eccolomedia.com/publications.htm. This two-page PDF is short, but it
contains an intriguing video chat with the company founder, Lorie Loe.
By the way, this paper recommends embedding audio and video into B2B
content to help engage your audience and then goes on to take its own
advice. In coming years, I expect to see many similar examples of
text-driven white papers with multimedia content added to the same PDF
"container."

Microsites built around a white paper

The second possible path to a Generation 3.0 white paper is a microsite
on the web with multimedia that visitors can access anywhere, anytime. A
white paper can form the heart of this format, with its content
repurposed as various forms of media on the associated web pages,
including audio, video, and interactivity.

You can see an example of this approach from EMC/IDC at
www.emc.com/collateral/demos/microsites/emc-digital-universe-2011/index.htm.
This microsite explores a single topic — the vast scope of the world's
information — in just a few web pages. When you arrive, the welcome page
automatically runs a video executive summary, where a company VP
delivers a scripted excerpt from the core white paper. Viewers can click
links to jump to different sections of the text, graphics, and each
sponsor's website. IDC describes this approach as "a market overview in
a quick-reference, mixed-content, and mixed-media format."

This kind of microsite can provide all the expected Generation 3.0
elements of text, graphics, audio, video, web links, and interactivity.
This model certainly sets out an interesting path to explore; a key
challenge may be finding the additional budget to do the required HTML
coding, video, and digital production.

Infographics with layered content

An infographic conveys data or knowledge by using visual metaphors in a
scientific or playful way; in other words, they include text and
graphics on the same page. In recent years, the use of infographics has
exploded in B2B marketing. Naturally enough, a well-done infographic can
help business people visualize and understand a numbered list, trend, or
market space.

As a third possible path to Generation 3.0, an infographic could
visually present the executive summary of a white paper, with various
areas a viewer can click or zoom to see more details on any particular
point. Although the viewer could choose his own path through the
infographic, the presentation would be driven by a compressed set of
points boiled down from a longer discussion in the white paper and
packaged as a document.

I haven't seen a white paper repurposed this way yet, perhaps because
most infographics are developed as stand-alone graphics. But there's no
reason this couldn't be done on the web or with software like Prezi
(www.prezi.com) that enables you to pan and zoom around a presentation
to incorporate different media and layers of information.

Mobile apps

The fourth possible future, and the furthest off, is a mobile app
running on a smartphone or tablet, presenting a cluster of information
with no need for the old-fashioned concept of a document. Freed from the
restrictions of a defined document — just as individual songs are now
freed from packaging into CDs or albums — this content could be
accessed, updated, or personalized on the fly. In fact, the information
in a white paper could be tailored and distributed according to the
psychographics, demographics, or preferences of each individual viewer.

You can see the start of this trend in the digital versions of some
magazines created for the iPad. For example, the digital versions of The
Economist, Vanity Fair, Wired, and other forward-thinking magazines
feature embedded video, links to other stories by the same authors or on
the same topic, outtakes from photo sessions, animations, product demos
and reviews, and so on. These digital magazines go partway along this
fourth path. They’re even purchased and downloaded to mobile devices
just like apps.

Charts and graphs updated “automagically” — like a live report on the
up-to-the-minute value of pork bellies, various world currencies, or
your team’s pennant chances — aren’t hard to visualize on the always-on
mobile device. Nor is content that’s personalized according to the
demographics or psychographics of an individual viewer. For example, a
mining executive may see a front cover of a white paper showing a mining
operation, while a prospect working for an airline sees an airport
lounge. You could swap whole chunks of multimedia in and out as likely
viewing to different prospects. All these ideas can sound like idle
speculation, but as technology enables these sorts of publishing
approaches, B2B marketers will try them. And some form of the venerable
white paper will live on in all its glory.

OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 4

Just the FAQs on White Papers

In This Chapter

[arrow] Understanding what a white paper is and what sets it apart from
other documents

[arrow] Determining the who, why, where, and when of white papers

[arrow] Exploring the hows of white papers — how long, how much, and how
many

You may be wondering, "What the heck is a white paper, anyway?" That's
an excellent question. I asked the same thing myself when I first
started writing white papers more than 15 years ago and looked all over
for a list of frequently asked questions. I couldn't find one.
Eventually, after I found or worked out the answers for myself, I
decided to create an FAQ and put it online. My White Paper FAQ page at
www.thatwhitepaperguy.com/white-paper-faq.html has now been visited more
than 85,000 times. This chapter presents many of these questions and
answers in print form for the first time.

In this chapter, I answer more than 20 questions that most often occur
to business people and writers about white papers. These answers are
grouped by the five w’s (and one h): who, what, why, where, when, and
how — everything from “What is a white paper anyway?” to “How many white
papers are ‘enough’ for a company?”

And if you ever have a question about white papers that isn’t covered in
this chapter, I invite you to post it to my LinkedIn Group called “Get
More From Your White Papers.” You’ll get an answer from me and perhaps
spark some discussion from other group members.

Working Out the Whats of White Papers

White papers are a mainstay in B2B marketing, but not everyone
understands what they’re all about. This section answers all the
frequently asked questions starting with what. Here, you find what a
white paper is, what industry standards or conventions define a white
paper, what other names white papers go by, and what makes them
different from other marketing pieces, like blogs, brochures, case
studies, or e-books.

What is a white paper anyway?

Ask ten people this question, and you’ll likely get 12 different
answers. People call anything and everything a white paper. When I’ve
asked that question over the years to marketing executives and seasoned
copywriters, I’ve heard the following responses:

[check.png] A bait-piece

[check.png] A buzz piece

[check.png] The glue that holds any marketing campaign together

[check.png] A manifesto

[check.png] Any information widget used to promote a company

[check.png] A way to freeze-dry your ideas

[check.png] That rare document that can be all things to all people

For me, none of these exotic definitions quite do the trick. The best
definition I’ve found, after many years of looking, says it this way:

A white paper is a persuasive essay that uses facts and logic to promote
a B2B product, service, technology, or methodology.

You can identify a white paper by its content and format:

[check.png] The content of a white paper ideally provides useful
information for readers seeking to understand an issue, solve a problem,
or make a decision. The content can include explaining a certain
offering from a B2B vendor or a new way to solve a nagging industry
problem.

[check.png] The format of a white paper is ideally somewhere between a
technical manual and a glossy brochure, between a dry-as-dust academic
paper and an annual report. It can include a graphic cover and one or
more business graphics inside to help explain the contents, but a white
paper is still driven by text.

What are the industry standards for white papers?

Unfortunately, anyone can call anything a white paper. And people do. No
laws or regulations can stop them. For instance, consider the length.
Today’s typical white paper is six to eight pages long, a little shorter
than in past years. But I’ve seen everything from a 2-page flier to a
100-page book labeled as a white paper.

Consider the format. The typical white paper looks more appealing than a
technical manual yet not as slick as a brochure. But I’ve seen white
papers as dull as a memo and others as colorful as a cereal box. The
typical white paper is distributed as a PDF on the web. But many are
printed for sales calls, press kits, and trade shows, and some are
posted online as HTML or split up to make microsites.

If no firm standards exist, don’t white papers have at least a few
shared conventions? Yes, I believe some conventions have been slowly
emerging over the years. Seasoned writer Jonathan Kantor and I developed
the following checklist. For us to consider any document a white paper,
it must

[check.png] Be built from narrative text

[check.png] Be at least five pages long in portrait format

[check.png] Provide educational, practical, and useful content, not a
sales pitch

[check.png] Provide well-researched facts, not just opinions

[check.png] Be used before a sale, not after a sale

[check.png] Include an introduction or executive summary

Everyone else may not be so old school. But I believe this tight
definition works best. After all, if you can call any information
published by any B2B vendor for any purpose a white paper, then why even
bother with that term? Why not just call everything information or
marketing bumf?

What else do people call white papers?

White papers come in many types, with no accepted system for labeling
them precisely. Given this, the majority of white papers fall into one
of the three main types I discuss in Part II:

[check.png] Backgrounders that describe the technical features and
benefits of one particular product or service

[check.png] Numbered lists that provide a light and lively roundup of
some highlights about some issue

[check.png] Problem/solutions that recommend a new, improved solution
for a serious business or technical problem

Beyond these three, many other names can describe white papers, as shown
in the Acceptable Names or Document Types column in Table 4-1. But
remember, no rules or universal standards define what makes a white
paper, so people use these labels somewhat randomly. Although you can
find a lot of types of useful information, I don’t consider all of them
white papers.

Table 4-1 Other Names for White Papers

  ------------------------------------ --------------------------------------
  Acceptable Names or Document Types   Unacceptable Names or Document Types
  Competitive review                   Application guide
  Discussion paper                     Cheat sheet
  Evaluator’s guide                    Installation guide
  Executive briefing                   Manual
  Market overview                      Optimizer
  Position paper                       Pocket guide
  Product briefing                     Reference
  Special report                       Troubleshooting guide
  ------------------------------------ --------------------------------------

For example, Internet marketing guru Perry Marshall names 40-plus types
of documents that he considers white papers, including all those in the
Unacceptable Names or Document Types column in Table 4-1. Notice that
the items in that column are all documentation used after a purchase to
help install, master, or troubleshoot a system. Although those documents
may be useful, they’re not white papers. A white paper is strictly a
presales document used for sales and marketing before a purchase, not
for training or support after a purchase.

[tip.eps] The label white paper has been overused in some sectors and
never established in others. For some audiences, marketing teams may
want to give these documents another label that resonates better. You
don’t have to change the contents at all; just consider using the label
executive briefing, guide, research report, special report, or
technology backgrounder instead.

What’s the difference between white papers and other marketing
materials?

B2B marketing teams generate all sorts of content to get the word out
about their products or services, including blog posts, brochures, case
studies, e-books, and, of course, white papers. Not everyone knows what
sets each type apart from all the rest or when to choose one over
another.

Table 4-2 provides a summary of the differences between white papers and
other common marketing materials. In the following sections, I compare
and contrast white papers with each of these other pieces.

[White Papers and Other Documents]

Comparing white papers and blog posts

Most people can tell the difference between a white paper and a blog
post. For starters, a white paper is much longer. Beyond that, a good
white paper is based on established facts and logical arguments, like a
well-researched article in an industry journal. But a blog post can be
sheer opinion or even a rant, like a letter to the editor. Table 4-2
sums up the key differences between a blog post and a white paper.

After you write a white paper, you can easily create blog posts from it.
In fact, a good white paper contains enough ideas to fuel several posts.
Here’s the best way to use both together:

1. Publish an effective white paper.

2. Extract one key idea to blog about.

3. At the end of the blog, point to the landing page for the full white
paper.

4. Repeat Steps 2 and 3 to cover all the key ideas in the white paper.

Using the SEO power of your blog helps build visibility and downloads
for your white paper. However, don’t expect an instant rush of web
traffic. Some SEO enthusiasts get overexcited and say a blog can
generate vast amounts of traffic and push your site to the top of
Google. This rarely happens in B2B marketing. Business buyers take a
good white paper far more seriously than a blog post. And to achieve
what B2B marketers want — a steady trickle of warm, qualified leads —
white papers are in a whole different galaxy beyond blog posts.

[tip.eps] The easiest and most informal flavor of white paper is a
numbered list with a title like “6 Things You Must Know about BI
Software before You Buy.” After you publish a white paper as a numbered
list, make sure to blog about it. Your blog can present the bare list of
numbered points and direct readers who want more details to the full
white paper. Your white paper can present more detail, more evidence,
and more logical arguments than the blog post. (For more about blogging
and white papers, head to Chapter 16.)

Contrasting white papers and brochures

White papers and brochures are almost complete opposites. Brochures are
sales documents intended to create interest and desire, often by pushing
emotional buttons, such as fear, greed, envy, or vanity. Brochures are
generally colorful, flashy, and filled with promises, using copywriting
and advertising techniques.

White papers, on the other hand, are persuasive essays about a certain
B2B product, service, technology, methodology, or new solution to an old
problem. White papers persuade through irrefutable facts, ironclad
logic, impeccable statistics, and quotes from industry opinion makers.
They’re generally less flashy and more factual. A white paper should be
more dignified, substantial, and informative than a brochure, using
plain English and the occasional rhetorical device. Refer to Table 4-2
to see how brochures and white papers differ.

[warning_bomb.eps] Some companies simply reformat an existing brochure
and call the results a white paper. Doing so is a waste of effort that
irritates most readers when they discover you’ve given them nothing but
a sales pitch. Take the time to write a proper white paper, and you’ll
be rewarded with more leads, better word of mouth, and increased sales.

Spotting the differences in white papers and case studies

Case studies are extended testimonials on how a product or service
helped someone in the real world. They’re typically 750 to 1,200 words
long, written in a journalistic style with many quotes from the
customer. The classic format for a case study is before/after or
problem/solution. Case studies tend to be used later in the sales cycle
to reassure a prospect that other buyers just like them benefited from
the same offering and are prepared to endorse the vendor.

White papers, on the other hand, are persuasive essays, generally 3,000
words or more, written in a somewhat academic style, with no direct
quotes from the vendor. A white paper may use the problem/solution
structure but rarely before/after. White papers tend to be used earlier
in the sales cycle to help prospects visualize a possible solution to a
nagging problem. At a certain point in the sales funnel, most prospects
switch from looking at white papers to looking at case studies, and
that’s fine. Table 4-2 lists the key differences between the two.

[tip.eps] You can include a brief case study inside a white paper,
either as a sidebar, a proof point in the text, or a pull quote. You’ll
likely need to condense the case study and include only the bare outline
of the story, such as the bottom-line results. But you can’t include a
white paper inside a case study; a white paper is just too long and too
different.

Telling white papers and e-books apart

I’m not talking about an e-Pub version of the latest vampire novel for
tweens or a 99¢ e-book on how to clean a fish in four easy steps. I’m
thinking only of the e-books published by B2B companies as part of their
marketing efforts. And these two marketing documents — an e-book and a
white paper — are often the most difficult of all to tell apart.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

When to use an e-book rather than a white paper

Here are three scenarios when an e-book may work better for your company
than a white paper:

[check.png] Your audience is especially prone to distraction. They may
be young or often on the road. An e-book may sound like more fun than a
white paper, which may sound like a lot of work.

[check.png] Many of your competitors publish white papers. If you’re
trying to break through the noise of competing white papers, an e-book
may sound different enough to be engaging. You may gain more traction by
presenting the content as an e-book rather than a white paper.

[check.png] You have superior design skills on hand. If you’re aiming to
make a splash with an e-book, you need to make it look really good. B2B
e-books benefit from the lack of standards, because so few formatting
conventions constrain you. You can use different backgrounds, wild
typefaces, animated graphics, and other visual flourishes that may turn
off readers in a white paper.

The goals of many white papers and e-books are the same. An ideal e-book
helps your target audience members understand an issue, solve a problem,
or make a decision. If your content does that, you can call it an
e-book, a white paper, or whatever, and your audience will still
appreciate it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last year, I wrote a big e-book for a client. Before I started, I
searched high and low for guidance on what makes a good e-book. How long
should they be? How many graphics? Landscape or portrait format?
Unfortunately, it looks like an e-book can be just about any length on
just about any topic. Some experts say that e-books are just gussied-up
white papers turned on their sides. In any case, Table 4-2 highlights
the key differences between a B2B e-book and a white paper.

With no clear standards or conventions established yet for e-books,
people call just about anything an e-book. An e-book can be anywhere
from 10 to 100 pages long and packaged as a PDF, slide deck, or some
lesser-known format. An e-book can have a lot of color and graphics, or
not much at all. Fans of e-books call them “the hip and stylish younger
sister to the nerdy white paper,” while those of the opposite opinion
say things like, “put some lipstick on a white paper and you’ve got an
e-book.”

Figuring Out Who Writes and Reads White Papers

Knowing the types of people and companies that get involved with white
papers can help peel back another layer of the mystery. This section
answers the frequently asked questions that start with who, such as who
publishes white papers, who reads them, who hires people to write them,
and who gets hired to write them.

Who publishes white papers?

B2B vendors publish white papers to help attract and nurture prospects,
close sales, and get attention. White papers abound in the technology
sector to explain the latest software and hardware products. But more
and more white papers are written about many other types of B2B
offerings.

In fact, any B2B vendor selling anything relatively new, complex, or
expensive could likely benefit from a white paper. That definition
includes many hundreds of thousands of companies in all the following
sectors:

[check.png] Business services

[check.png] Computer and peripheral makers

[check.png] Construction companies

[check.png] Consulting firms

[check.png] Delivery and transport services

[check.png] Educational suppliers and private schools

[check.png] Electrical and electronic gear

[check.png] Energy companies

[check.png] Environmental or “green tech”

[check.png] Government, NGOs, and nonprofits

[check.png] Healthcare devices, products, and services

[check.png] Heavy equipment manufacturers, such as aerospace, factory
systems, ships, transit systems, and trains

[check.png] Real estate (commercial)

[check.png] Technical services, laboratories, quality control, and
testing

On the other hand, vendors of any relatively familiar, simple, and
inexpensive B2C (business to consumer) products don’t often publish
white papers because they have little need for them. After all, most
consumers don’t want to read a six- or eight-page paper before they buy
something. The exceptions, especially in the health and medical fields,
include consumers who need or prefer to be extremely well informed about
their choices.

Who reads white papers?

Almost any businessperson contemplating the purchase of a relatively
new, complex, or high-priced product or service for his business may
well read some white papers about it. White paper readers come from a
number of roles in business, such as the following:

[check.png] Corporate executives (decision makers)

[check.png] Finance executives (financial recommenders)

[check.png] IT managers and staff (technical recommenders)

[check.png] Line-of-business managers (managers of potential users)

[check.png] User representatives (potential users)

[check.png] In-house supporters of the purchase (“champions”)

In larger companies, up to 25 of these people may sit together on a
selection committee that makes a collective decision. In smaller firms,
some people may wear several of these hats and meet informally to
discuss their purchase.

White papers are especially well read by IT managers. One survey showed
that they read 30 white papers a year, and some read more than one a
week! White papers used to be aimed strictly at IT professionals, but
today, many less technical people are involved in major buying
decisions, especially executives from finance teams. These people are
seeking plain-language explanations with clear business benefits, backed
up by convincing facts and arguments. And business people in any role
routinely pass good white papers up and down the chain of command, both
to their managers and their staff. They may also pass them to peers or
partners in other firms.

Who hires people to write white papers?

In my experience, the business people who hire a contract white paper
writer from outside a company are mainly marketing managers. Because
most white papers are published as part of a content marketing campaign,
the responsibility to produce and promote them falls naturally to the
marketing department. Nearly all the requests for white papers that I
get come from a marketing manager.

At times, a product manager in a large company may commission a white
paper. Even rarer, the head of R&D or engineering or another technical
manager may request a white paper to help explain some details about a
complex offering. Even then, these executives most likely turn to the
marketing department for help finding a writer, managing the project,
and promoting the finished document.

Who writes white papers?

Professional or nonprofessional writers, either in-house employees or
­independent contractors hired from outside, can write white papers. The
nonprofessional writers who produce white papers can be engineers,
product managers, sales people, members of the management team, or even
company founders. Recent surveys show that 50 to 60 percent of B2B
companies that do content marketing outsource some or all of their
efforts. Writing a white paper is likely to be outsourced because white
papers are a difficult format that can take years to master.

Most of the independent white paper writers I’ve met have come into the
field from three main paths. Some are experienced technical writers who
were asked to write white papers for their company and became intrigued
by these documents, which are more interesting to work on than technical
manuals. Some are seasoned journalists who got laid off by a newspaper,
decided to hang out their shingles as independent writers, and
appreciate the factual nature of white papers. Others are skilled
copywriters who decided to focus solely or partly on writing white
papers so they could offer that as a new service to their B2B marketing
clients. See Chapter 2 for tips on how to succeed in white papers if you
come from any of these writing backgrounds.

Understanding Why White Papers Are So Useful

Here comes perhaps the most fundamental question of all: Why bother?
This section answers the frequently asked questions starting with why. I
address why companies publish white papers, why prospects read them, and
why writers write them. These answers speak to the purpose of white
papers and their tremendous effectiveness when they’re done well.

Why do companies publish white papers?

In general, vendors publish white papers for three key reasons: to
generate leads at the top of the sales funnel, to nurture prospects
through the middle of the funnel, or to help close sales at the bottom
of the funnel. Some publish white papers to attract attention, to
redefine a market space, or to stake out a position as a leader in their
industry. In the end, all these goals are measured the same: Are we
attracting enough leads? And are we closing enough sales?

B2B vendors publish white papers for all these reasons:

[check.png] Gather leads for the sales force.

[check.png] Educate potential customers.

[check.png] Influence a selection committee.

[check.png] Educate the sales force or channel partners.

[check.png] Educate the media.

[check.png] Send to a trade publication or website.

[check.png] Redefine a market space.

[check.png] Build credibility or mindshare.

[check.png] Keep up with competitors who have white papers.

On a strategic level, white papers fit into the growing trend of
“marketing with content.” This model acknowledges that skeptical
prospects are hungry for a vendor who can serve as a trusted advisor,
not just a peddler of their wares. A white paper can serve this purpose
remarkably well.

Why do prospects read white papers?

White paper readers are seeking useful information to help them
understand an issue, solve a problem, or make a decision. This often
involves learning about the features and benefits of a product or
service they’re considering buying. A survey of IT managers by
Forbes.com and Bitpipe (now TechTarget) showed that they read white
papers for the following reasons:

[check.png] To stay on top of new trends (76 percent)

[check.png] To get information about products and vendors (69 percent)

[check.png] To compare products (50 percent)

[check.png] To help justify buying decisions (42 percent)

[check.png] To develop a shortlist of qualified vendors (33 percent)

This list sounds realistic to me. Business people must try to stay
current with their field, compare different vendors accurately, and make
wise decisions. White papers can help them with all these challenges.

Why do writers write white papers?

Writers write white papers for three main reasons: the money, the change
of pace, and the challenge.

[check.png] For the money: Doing white papers pays better than most
other formats of B2B copywriting, such as autoresponders, brochures,
e-mails, or web pages. You can earn more as a copywriter if you happen
to write the control-busting sales letter of the year and get royalties
on all the sales that letter generates for the next five years. However,
something like that rarely happens. For most copywriters, getting paid
$5,000 to write a six- to eight-page factual article is a big assignment
at great pay. For some specific estimates of the earning potential in
this field, see “How much can a writer earn doing white papers?,” later
in this chapter. For more on the overall opportunities for writers in
white papers, see Chapter 2.

[check.png] For the change of pace: Technical writers often work on 200-
or 300-page manuals that take months to complete (I speak from
experience). Journalists regularly write short news stories or light
fare focused on human interest or celebrities; they don’t often get to
sink their teeth into substantial subjects. Copywriters usually work on
a steady diet of sales letters or web copy. A white paper gives a writer
stuck in one of these ruts a welcome change to do a piece that may be
longer, shorter, more interesting, more serious, more factual, or more
persuasive than what they usually work on. This change of pace helps
writers stretch their creative muscles, which many people appreciate.

[check.png] For the challenge: One of the most challenging assignments
in B2B marketing is helping a company articulate the competitive
features and benefits of an offering and how it can solve an old problem
better than anything else. Doing the research to find enough convincing
proof is one part of that challenge; another is choosing the most
effective rhetorical devices to deliver the message.

Pinpointing the Wheres of White Papers

Location, location, location: That’s certainly an adage in real estate,
and it does drive the frequently asked questions starting with where. In
this section, I touch on where prospects find white papers, where they
read them, where white papers originally came from, and where they’re
likely going.

Where do B2B prospects find white papers?

In the old days, many business buyers got white papers sent to them by
salespeople or handed to them at trade show booths. Today, business
people tend to find white papers through online searches, social media,
content networks, and vendor websites.

[check.png] Online searches: Most business people today start their
research on any topic by doing an online search, mainly in Google, which
gets the majority of all online searches. They may search for their
problem as a complete phrase, something like “ERP software as a
service.” Or they may search with a shorter acronym, like “ERP SAAS.”

[check.png] Social media: Blogs can be a great place to find out about a
new white paper, and so can other popular social media used by business
people, such as Google+, LinkedIn, Twitter, or YouTube. The jury is
still out on how effective Facebook, Pinterest, and other social media
are for B2B marketing.

[check.png] Content networks: Many B2B prospects use content networks
like Bitpipe, KnowledgeStorm, TechRepublic, and others to find relevant
white papers. You can be sure to find white papers on industry trends in
these sources, which are most often linked to a whole armload of
industry forums and publications.

In fact, these content networks make it extremely easy to get an instant
snapshot of their most popular white paper downloads. Here are three
ways to check on the current hot topics:

• Go to Bitpipe (www.bitpipe.com) and notice the similar list of Popular
Topics. Then click Most Popular Reports to see the 50 most downloaded
white papers for the day.

• Go to KnowledgeStorm (www.knowledgestorm.com) and notice the list of
Top Requested Categories.

• Go to TechRepublic (www.techrepublic.com/whitepapers) and see the
Hottest and Top Rated white papers.

[check.png] Vendor websites: Another likely place to find white papers
is on the websites of vendors active in a certain field. Of course, you
have to know their names in advance, so this approach favors the usual
suspects — the top vendors in any field. Business prospects may be
looking for a different approach, perhaps from some new vendor they’ve
never heard of before.

Where do people read white papers?

Because white papers are about business, many people read them at work
at their desks. But not everyone stays put all day long, so many
business people access white papers from laptops and tablets while
moving from one client site to another, during their daily commutes, or
on airplanes or trains during longer trips. Some people catch up on
their reading at home in the evenings or on the weekend.

In the old days, white papers were all designed to read as hard copy on
paper. Today, more people read them right off the screen. Again, these
screens may be large, such as on a desktop monitor; medium, such as on
an iPad or other tablet; or pint-size, such as on a mobile phone. The
design and content of an effective white paper must work well in all
these form factors to truly reach all possible members of the target
audience where they do business.

Where did white papers first come from?

Strangely enough, the term white paper is an accident of history. This
term first arose early in the 20th century in Great Britain, when it was
used to distinguish government report and position papers bound with
white covers from longer reports and policy books with blue covers. I
found a PDF of a white paper from 1907, and these documents were being
published for some years before then.

White papers were often used in science and medicine during World War
II, the 1950s, and the 1960s. With the rise of the personal computer in
the ’80s, white papers became quite popular in the IT industry. And in
the ’90s, the web provided an inexpensive distribution channel that
sparked today’s ongoing explosion of white papers. All in all, this
long-form marketing document has been going strong for close to 100
years. For details about the history of white papers, see Chapter 3.

Where are white papers going in the future?

For the near future, white papers should continue to be popular with
marketers and prospects. Over the longer term, new formats for
delivering information will continue to be explored. For the kind of
persuasive B2B content usually packaged as a white paper, I believe
these new formats will include multimedia PDFs containing audio,
animation, interaction, or video; microsites built around a core white
paper; infographics with layered content for a viewer to browse on
demand; and mobile apps that combine information and visuals with
interaction.

Packaging B2B information for each of these channels will require
different skills and production methods. Some may well offer a more
engaging experience for certain audiences, especially members of the
so-called Millennial Generation born after 1985, who grew up with the
web and mobile technology — essentially enjoying “the world in their
pocket.” For more about the likely future of white papers, see Chapter
3.

Tracking the Whens of White Papers

No time like the present to get into the most frequently asked questions
starting with when. In this section, I answer questions about when
companies publish white papers, when prospects read them, and when each
type is the most useful.

When do companies publish white papers?

Companies don’t publish white papers in any special month or season. And
a white paper isn’t more effective at a particular time of the month or
day of the week. A more useful way to analyze when companies publish
white papers is to look at the sales cycle for any offering. The longer
a B2B sales cycle — that is, the longer B2B prospects spend in the sales
funnel — the more likely the vendor uses white papers to attract and
engage them.

Problem/solution white papers are most effective early on, to draw fresh
leads into the top of the sales funnel. Numbered lists can be used
anywhere in the sales funnel to attract or nurture leads or attack
competitors on the prospect’s shortlist. Backgrounders are most useful
near the bottom of the sales funnel to provide technical details an
evaluator needs to help compare several offerings.

When do B2B prospects read white papers?

Prospects look at white papers before they make a purchase. Companies
give these stages different names, such as Vision or Planning. People
tend to read white papers when they need to

[check.png] Dream up a way around a pressing problem.

[check.png] Wonder whether anything could solve their problem.

[check.png] Look for something to satisfy their wish list.

[check.png] Research what’s on the market.

[check.png] Make up a shortlist of qualified vendors.

Executives at the content network KnowledgeStorm encourage technology
vendors to think of a sale in four phases, and white papers can help
during the first three.

[check.png] Stage 1 — Vision: A businessperson struggles with a problem
and imagines how to solve it. At this point, a problem/solution white
paper can help him visualize a new way to solve the problem. Or a
provocative numbered list can help gain his attention.

[check.png] Stage 2 — Planning: A prospect tries to map a set of
functional requirements to a certain offering. That’s when a more
detailed, technical backgrounder can help him understand how a given
solution would work in his environment. Or a numbered list can attack
another vendor or reframe the buyer’s checklist.

[check.png] Stage 3 — Evaluation: A prospect looks at a set of offerings
from a shortlist of vendors. A backgrounder in the form of an
evaluator’s guide for a complex product can be helpful at this point.
Somewhere in here, most B2B buyers start looking more at case studies
about other customers than at any additional white papers.

[check.png] Stage 4 — Acquisition: A buyer purchases an offering. The
customer may need added information at this point, but it’s more
accurate to call this production information, documentation, or training
material. After all, the white paper has played its role and the sale
has been made. Everything from this point on is after-sales training and
support.

When should a company use each type of white paper?

Each type of white paper works best to deliver certain information at a
certain time. Depending on your marketing challenge, you can pick the
best type to meet that goal, as follows:

[check.png] To get attention with provocative views: numbered list

[check.png] To build recognition for your company: problem/solution

[check.png] To support a product launch: backgrounder

[check.png] To educate your sales force, channel partners, analysts,
bloggers, or journalists: problem/solution

[check.png] To generate leads at the top of the sales funnel:
problem/solution

[check.png] To nurture prospects in the middle of the funnel: numbered
list

[check.png] To attack competitors anywhere in the funnel: numbered list

[check.png] To support a technical evaluation at the bottom of the
funnel: backgrounder

[check.png] To help close sales at the bottom of the funnel:
backgrounder

[tip.eps] You can always combine a numbered list with either a
backgrounder or a problem/solution to accomplish the same goal. For more
on the three main types of white papers, see Part II.

Figuring Out the Hows of White Papers

Everybody likes to know how to do stuff. This section covers the most
frequently asked questions that start with how. Here, you find answers
for how long a white paper takes to create, how much it costs (if you’re
a marketing manager), how much you can earn writing white papers (if
you’re a writer), how to tell whether a company needs a white paper, and
how many white papers are “enough” for any company.

How do people read white papers?

Almost everyone has more to read, more to remember, and more to do than
he can possibly get to. For example, one study showed that the typical
manager has more than 50 hours of work sitting right on his desk. He’s
certainly not waiting for another document to add to the pile.

No one reads white papers for fun; white papers are for work. And people
don’t read white papers the same way they read a novel by their favorite
author, paying attention to every sentence. Instead, they tend to skim,
scan, and skip — especially when they’re reading on the screen. So a
wall of gray text unrelieved by any graphics isn’t likely to engage many
white paper readers. Today, these documents must be carefully written
and designed for business readers with limited time and attention.

White papers need to use visual breakers — bullets, graphics, headings,
pull quotes, sidebars, and tables — to direct the attention of people
who skim, scan, and skip. These visuals need to point out the key
messages of the document in a way that’s easy for today’s busy readers
to follow. For tips on how to design a white paper, see Chapter 18.

How long does a white paper take to create?

The typical white paper takes between 24 and 50 hours to complete,
according to a survey of more than 600 writers in 2007. That means the
equivalent of one to two weeks of full-time effort. But don’t expect to
complete a white paper in one to two weeks of elapsed time. This process
doesn’t happen in one smooth, continuous workflow; there are lags while
the client and writer wait for one another and other team members.

Like any corporate writing project, creating a white paper involves
interviews, research, outlining, writing drafts, and doing graphics and
page design. The client will expect a few progress reports. And the
writer will need to incorporate comments into at least two drafts, maybe
more. If you manage this process well, writing a white paper can be
smooth and efficient. If not, it can turn into the never-ending project
that drags on and on and on.

The more experience a white paper writer has, the faster he tends to
work, and the fewer missteps he takes. The survey showed that
freelancers tend to produce significantly faster than in-house or
nonprofessional writers.

In my own experience on close to 200 white papers, each project takes
about six weeks of elapsed time. This span includes everything from the
first discussions between the client and the writer through the entire
12-step process described in Part III up to the delivery of a finished
white paper. And it can easily take longer, if subject matter experts
travel a lot, take their time to do interviews or reviews, or manage to
get deadlocked over some issue.

The research, writing, and approvals of the text alone take a minimum of
four weeks, unless the project is put on an intense fast track; in this
case, most writers will bill extra for a rush job. The design,
illustration, proofing, and perhaps translation add at least another two
weeks or more. And then the promotions begin and can run for many
months, as described in Chapter 16.

The good news is, a B2B vendor can often continue using the same white
paper — at least one structured as a problem/solution — for a year or
more. This long life span helps achieve a positive return on the
investment of so much time.

How much does a white paper cost?

Any way you look at it, a white paper is a significant project that
requires a budget of thousands of dollars. Trying to do a white paper on
a tiny budget of a few hundred dollars likely won’t generate the kind of
results you need — unless you’re one of those Renaissance individuals
who can research, write, design, and promote a professional-quality
document all by yourself. And if you can do all of that, please give me
a call; I want to hire you.

Here are the possible costs related to producing a white paper, which
can be either outsourced or handled in-house:

[check.png] Researching, writing, and editing

[check.png] Illustration and design

[check.png] Translation, if required

[check.png] Printing, if required

[check.png] Promotions

Table 4-3 sums up all these costs of outsourcing a white paper in three
possible scenarios. Remember these are only estimates, and your costs
may well vary.

[Costs for Outsourcing a White Paper]

The column marked Cut-Rate White Paper in Table 4-3 covers a low-end
project: hiring an inexperienced writer, pressing him for graphics and
design, and doing no promotions except a press release. Even with this
barely acceptable quality, the costs add up to $3,000. You can see how
unrealistic it is to expect a winning white paper from such a low
budget, especially when most competitors are routinely spending twice as
much.

The Typical White Paper budget covers a better-than-average writer, a
professional designer, and printing 250 color copies for smaller events.
But the paper isn’t translated, and the company’s left with only $1,000
to run a few promotions. The bottom line for this effort comes to
$7,250. Any white paper produced on this kind of budget can do well, if
the vendor makes sure to plan, produce, and promote it effectively.

The third scenario, marked Major White Paper, covers everything a B2B
vendor could dream of spending on a white paper. This budget includes a
top writer plus translations into two other languages, perhaps Spanish
and French to cover the rest of the Americas. Design costs allow for
three different versions, one in each language. The company can afford
to print 2,000 copies in color for a big event, with another $10,000 for
other promotions. The total budget comes to $26,500. For that kind of
money — as long as the content is compelling and well targeted — a
vendor should get one of the standout white papers of the year in its
sector.

Counting the costs of researching, writing, and editing

Most writers do their own research, based on materials and directions
given by the client. And very few writers pay for their own editing, so
you can lump these three expenses into one. For pricing information, I
drew on four sources: interviews with the content networks; estimates
from AWAI, the country’s largest copywriting training center; the latest
annual Writer’s Market, and the largest survey of white paper writers
ever done. The average from all four sources is $4,180. I bumped that up
to $5,000 to cover a better-than-average writer for the typical
scenario, and to $7,000 to cover an expert writer for the major
scenario.

Adding up the fees for illustration and design

Illustration and design cost significantly less than writing. Although
these creative steps add tremendous value to a white paper, they take
significantly less time than writing a white paper from scratch. For a
round estimate, count on about $1,000 for several relatively simple
graphics and a straightforward design of six to eight pages of content,
a cover, and the rest of the front matter and back matter. For a major
project with more illustration work, double that to $2,000. If the
designer has to repour the translated text into each other version,
count each translation as another job, because many pages will likely
need tweaked.

Saving without scrimping on translation

Translation from English into other European languages is most often
priced by the word. Don’t scrimp here. And by all means, don’t rely on
machine translation for such an important marketing document. If you do,
your carefully composed text could end up sounding silly, illogical, or
even insulting in another language. Expect to pay about 25¢ a word for a
white paper translation, which works out to less than $1,000 for any
document up to 4,000 words. It’s worth it.

Ideally, find a translator who is a native speaker of the target
language, an accomplished communicator, who can work right in the source
file from your designer, most likely an InDesign file. If you get lucky
here, you can avoid sending each translation of the white paper back to
your designer because your translator can return the InDesign file with
the translated text right on the pages and everything looking sharp.
Your translation budget may go up a little to pay for this expertise,
but your design budget won’t.

[remember.eps] Most other languages run longer than English; for
example, French takes 15 or 20 percent more characters to convey the
same meaning. Spanish can be even more. So if you know your white paper
will be translated into other languages, ask your designer to leave lots
of white space at the bottom of columns and not cram in the headings.
The extra space gives a design-savvy translator more room to work in. If
your designer doesn’t like that idea, consider switching to a more
flexible supplier.

Factoring in the cost of printing

Printing costs depend on many variables: the number of pages, amount of
color, paper quality, number of copies, binding, and any extras like
covers. To check prices, I sent a typical 11-page white paper with
modest color on every page to FedEx (formerly Kinko’s) and Staples
asking for quotes on 10 and 100 copies. With a plastic coil binding,
quotes ranged from $1.20 to $2.20 a copy, depending on the paper, number
of copies, and extras; taxes and delivery are extra.

Outsourced printing adds up, but it may be justified if your company
routinely spends more than $100 to generate a lead, or if you’re going
to a big event like a trade show where you know your team will want to
hand out your latest white paper.

Of course, if you need only two or three copies for a meeting, many
business people just print them on their own color printers for a few
dollars’ worth of ink or toner. In fact, most prospects print their own
white papers after downloading them, which is a key reason the use of
white papers exploded with the web — vendors no longer have to pay for
printing or distribution; prospects now serve themselves.

Pinning a price on promoting

Promoting a white paper can cost next to nothing, or it can exceed all
the rest of the budget put together. Many companies stick to the no-fee
or low-fee tactics, which don’t run up any costs beyond the normal
payroll for a marketing team. Others use some of the more high-cost
tactics, such as syndicating a white paper on a content network or
advertising in trade magazines (see Chapter 16). One cost that’s easy to
justify is sending out a press release about a white paper through a
web-based service for a few hundred dollars. I consider this a must-do
for any white paper, no matter how small the budget.

Accounting for in-house costs

One other cost is the soft cost for all in-house efforts, including the
time it takes subject matter experts to answer questions and review
drafts — perhaps two to four hours per reviewer — and the time it takes
to manage a white paper project — likely six to eight hours. And
finally, there’s the time it takes marketing staff to plan and execute
all the white paper promotions, which can vary from a few hours to
several weeks. Because this cost is so variable and hard to calculate, I
left it out of Table 4-3.

[remember.eps] The more experienced the writer you work with, and the
closer he sticks to the 12-step process explained in Part III, the lower
those in-house efforts should be. That’s because the writer will know
how to engineer the project for success, interview efficiently, write a
series of staged deliverables for your approval instead of jumping into
the first draft too early, and generally avoid misunderstandings, false
starts, and rework.

How much can a writer earn doing white papers?

White paper writers work either in-house or as independent freelancers,
most often called copywriters. Unfortunately, labor statistics don’t
break out this full-time job as a separate profession; it’s even lumped
in with screenwriters and poets, who obviously work on quite different
projects from white paper writers.

Working as an in-house copywriter

You don’t likely have a steady diet of white papers to write. More
likely, you write a mix of blog articles, case studies, press releases,
tweets, and an occasional white paper as a big project. You may work
either for a B2B vendor or for a creative agency that does the whole
range of advertising, PR, and other campaigns.

According to several salary surveys, junior in-house copywriters in the
United States typically earn $30,000 to $45,000, while senior
copywriters can make up to $85,000. Intermediates rank somewhere in the
middle, with benefits on top of salary in all cases. As so many other
things do, these salaries fall into a bell curve, with most copywriters
clumped in the middle and a few exceptionally high- and low-paid people
at the edges.

Working as an independent copywriter

You can focus entirely on white papers, or you can write them as one of
many types of documents and projects that you take on. Most full-time
independent copywriters aspire to earn more than $100,000 because they
must pay for their own benefits and retirement.

[truestory_property.eps] I’ve promoted myself exclusively as “That White
Paper Guy” since 2005, yet I make only two-thirds of my income from
white papers. The rest comes from writing case studies, coaching other
writers, giving workshops, and even dabbling in writing mysteries. So
expecting that you can write nothing but white papers as a self-employed
independent is unrealistic.

Calculating your income from four factors

Four factors determine your income as a full-time white paper writer,
and the good news is that you’re pretty much in control of all four:

[check.png] How many white papers you can land

[check.png] How long it takes you to complete each project

[check.png] How much you work in a year

[check.png] How much you charge for each white paper

Here are three realistic scenarios for a beginner, an intermediate, and
a senior white paper writer. Say you’re a beginner in the field, without
a developed network, an established presence, or any strong specialty
you can claim. Because you’re just starting to master the white paper
format, the typical project takes you 60 hours, spread across four weeks
or so. You’re not booked solid and you spend a lot of time working on
your website, your social media platform, and other marketing. And you
charge a beginner’s rate of $3,000 each. So all told, you do 12 to 15
white papers a year for $3,000 each to gross around $40,000. That’s one
possible scenario at the low end.

At the other extreme, suppose you’re a seasoned freelancer who decided
to focus on white papers a few years ago. With a strong network, an
established specialty in a sector that uses many white papers, and great
marketing, you now bring in as many projects as you can handle. Say you
master the white paper format, so you get to the faster end of the
spectrum where you can finish most of them in about 30 hours. So if you
avoid distractions, you can comfortably finish one white paper in the
equivalent of a week.

You take 6 weeks of vacation, so you work 46 weeks a year, although you
still have to allow time to do some marketing, maintain your network,
and manage your business. And you charge a realistic $6,000 per project.
That means you can handily complete 30 white papers a year, for gross
revenue of $180,000. Maybe you can push a bit to do a little more. Not
bad at all!

There are two examples of possible freelance scenarios, at income levels
of $40,000 and $180,000 a year. A third scenario, for an intermediate
writer coming in somewhere between these two extremes, would mean
revenues topping $100,000. You can surely earn that kind of money if you
master the white paper format, bring in enough projects, complete each
one diligently, put in an honest day’s work, and charge a competitive
rate for your efforts.

How can you tell whether a company needs a white paper?

You may work as a marketing manager and wonder whether your B2B company
should be using white papers. Or you may be a white paper writer sizing
up a possible client and wondering whether it could benefit from a white
paper or two. Here are three simple questions that give you the answer:

[check.png] Does the company sell something new?

[check.png] Does the company sell something complex?

[check.png] Does the company sell something expensive?

If you can answer “yes” to at least one of these questions, the company
could probably benefit from using white papers. If you can answer “yes”
to two or three of those questions, the company can definitely use white
papers.

Any B2B vendor selling anything relatively new, complex, or expensive
probably needs one or more white papers to help tell its story. Whether
the company sells a product, a service, a technology, or a methodology,
it still needs one. Whether the company uses that white paper to gather
leads, nurture prospects, undercut competitors, or cement sales, it
still needs one.

Why these three questions? White papers help companies describe new
innovations that are difficult to research anywhere else. White papers
also help companies describe complicated offerings that take a little
explaining to sketch in their features and benefits and how they solve
an existing problem better than anything else. And white papers help
nurture prospects through a long sales cycle, creating another touch
point for the vendor and helping position the company as a trusted
advisor that provides truly helpful information.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

How many white papers does Acme NLP need?

No neat formula tells a company how many white papers it needs. So
here’s a sample company to consider. Acme NLP (Natural Language
Processing) is a software startup with a smarter way to analyze English.
The company seeks partners to embed its language processor into help
systems and virtual personas. The marketing director wants to use white
papers to get attention and generate leads. So how many white papers
does Acme NLP need?

To find the answer, I run through all the questions I discuss in the
“How many white papers are ‘enough’ for a company?” section.

[check.png] Experience: No one in the firm has ever created a white
paper. So Acme NLP should probably start slowly with one or two, then
review what it learned.

[check.png] Market segments: Acme NLP needs clients who create online
help and virtual personas. Are these two segments so different that each
needs its own white paper? If yes, the company needs two documents or
one “cloned” into two versions.

[check.png] Problems solved: The language processor really solves one
big problem, getting machines to understand natural language. So two
papers will still be enough.

[check.png] Competition: The company has a couple of competitors and
each has one white paper. So two will do for Acme NLP to hold its own
against the competition.

[check.png] Budget: The marketing director can get the budget for two
white papers in the next two quarters, giving Acme NLP the answer. For
now, two white papers will be enough. Those two documents may be enough
to do everything that Acme needs to attract partners and stay on track
with its business plans. After that, the company can review the results
and revisit this exercise to see how many white papers it needs for the
following period.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

White papers are now a standard part of the marketing arsenal for most
technology companies. After all, many of their offerings are new and
complicated, so that’s two out of three right off the bat. And many
businesses in other sectors, if they can answer “yes” to at least one of
these questions, could well benefit from using white papers as the
capstone of their content marketing.

How many white papers are “enough” for a company?

Marketing people often wonder: How many white papers should our company
publish? How many white papers are really enough? The correct answer, of
course, is “that all depends.” You can figure out what that depends on
in several ways.

For example, one of my clients asks me to write a white paper every time
his sales force comes up against a serious objection. The more
objections, the more white papers. After a few years, we’ve covered all
the big objections his prospects have come up with so far. But isn’t
there a more scientific method? Yes, there is. And here’s a list of
factors to help you find that answer for your company or your client.
(Also see the nearby sidebar “How many white papers does Acme NLP need?”
for an example using these factors.)

[check.png] Experience: How many white papers has the company published
so far? If the answer is none, it’s probably best to do one or two to
figure out the process.

[check.png] Market segments: How many markets does the company cover? It
likely needs at least one new white paper for each significant market at
a certain interval, such as two to four times a year. You can define
these segments in the following ways:

• By vertical market: Education, finance, retail, travel, or whatever

• By size: Small, enterprise, Fortune 500, or Fortune 100

• By volume: Number of employees, SKUs, transactions, or whatever

• By role of prospects: Financial, line of business, management team,
technical, user, or business owner

• By product line

[check.png] Problems solved: How many big problems does the company
solve? Does it need one white paper for each? Sometimes each “problem”
has a separate product line with its own marketing team; in this case,
you may want to treat each team as a separate company to work out how
many white papers it needs.

[check.png] Competition: Does the company have aggressive competitors
that publish white papers? How many? The scope and pace of competition
can certainly be a factor here.

[check.png] Budget: How many white papers can the company afford to
create and promote effectively? If the company has the budget for only
one white paper per quarter, four a year may have to be enough.

A small company with relatively few competitors may need to produce only
a couple of white papers per year. This small number likely fits the
company’s limited budget, staffing, and time resources, too.

A larger company with more aggressive competitors may clearly need more
white papers. For example, a medium-sized company with three main
markets may want one white paper for each market every quarter. In this
case, 12 white papers a year are enough.

And a Fortune 500 company likely has many product managers, each wanting
white papers for their individual products. For a company this size,
there’s no need to calculate how many white papers are enough. In this
case, the real answer may be “as many as all those product managers want
and can pay for.”

OceanofPDF.com

Part II

The Three Flavors of White Papers

[9781118496923-pp0201.eps]

Illustration by Wiley, Composition Services Graphics

[pt_webextra_bw.TIF] Go to www.dummies.com/extras/whitepapers to access
the Cheat Sheet created specifically for White Papers For Dummies.

In this part . . .

[check.png] Find out how to choose the appropriate white paper based on
your purpose and target audience.

[check.png] Understand how a backgrounder allows you to provide detailed
information about your company’s product or service. These
straightforward documents are as predictable as vanilla ice cream.

[check.png] Discover how to use a numbered list to present information
in an easy-to-read format that focuses on the highlights of your topic.
These papers are often as light and lively as strawberry ice cream.

[check.png] See how a problem/solution uses facts and logic to present a
new solution to a serious problem that afflicts a given industry. These
papers are complex, but they’re also as rich and satisfying as chocolate
ice cream.

[check.png] Figure out how to mix and match different types of white
papers to address two goals at once.

[check.png] Know the special elements to include in some white papers
but to leave out in others.

OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 5

Picking the Perfect Flavor for Your Next White Paper

In This Chapter

[arrow] Simplifying the world of white papers

[arrow] Comparing white papers to ice cream flavors

[arrow] Using your purpose and audience to help pick the perfect flavor

[arrow] Sampling a few white paper topics

The world of white papers can seem pretty overwhelming. And most white
paper “experts” don’t help by insisting that there are eight or ten
distinct types of white papers. That’s a lot to remember and a tough
decision to make every time you want to create a new white paper. But
are so many distinctions useful? Is all that complexity really needed? I
don’t think so. In this chapter, I explain why I believe there are
really only three main types of white papers, as different as vanilla,
strawberry, and chocolate ice cream.

When you understand these three flavors of white papers and how to use
each one, you gain more flexibility to deal with a wider set of
marketing challenges. And you’re more likely to provide your target
audience with helpful information that they can really use. Otherwise,
you may dish out a mishmash that confounds their expectations and leaves
them scratching their heads — or even worse, clicking away to look for a
white paper from a competitor.

In this chapter, I introduce the three main flavors of white papers,
sketch in their key characteristics, and suggest a simple, three-step
process for picking the perfect flavor for your next project. Plus I
tell you which flavors you can mix together for a tasty treat and which
ones you should always keep in separate bowls.

Recognizing the Three Purposes of White Papers

Until a few years ago, I agreed with every other white paper expert when
they pointed to 8 or 10 (or even 40!) different types of white papers.
Most people in the white paper world talked about papers focused on
business benefits, technical benefits, or a hybrid of both. We talked
about papers for executive briefings, technical evaluations, market
overviews, corporate vision, and on and on. Thinking that we had a
number of different white papers to work with made perfect sense. After
all, we needed a big set of tools in our marketing tool chest;
otherwise, how could we pick the right tool for the job?

Then one day, I was compiling a list of all the white papers I’d ever
worked on and impressed even myself when the total reached nearly 100.
(Since then, my list has grown close to 200.)

As I thought back over all those projects, I was struck by a new
realization: They all fall more or less into three big buckets. And each
type works best for one of the three key purposes that marketers seek to
accomplish with white papers:

[check.png] Generate leads.

[check.png] Get noticed or stand out from competitors.

[check.png] Explain the benefits of a product or service.

To be fair, when you include all the combinations among my three
biggies, you have seven possible flavors in all. (I know, I’ve checked
the math — many times — to make sure I got it right.) But only five of
those really work; the other two just make a mess.

The three flavors I introduce in this chapter and cover in detail in the
rest of Part II are fun to explore, simple to remember, and easy to use.
When I explain this in workshops, I see people’s eyes light up as they
realize the world of white papers is a lot simpler than they feared.
You’ll still hear lots of experts counting more types of white papers
than that, but you don’t have to listen to them. Take that, Mr.
40-Different-Types-of-White-Papers Guy!

Defining the Three Flavors: Vanilla, Strawberry, and Chocolate

Ice cream comes in dozens of different flavors, from banana cream to
white chocolate crunch. Yet year after year, three flavors are more
popular than any others, according to the International Ice Cream
Association and the NPD Group’s National Eating Trends. (Yes, some
people actually track these things closely.) The top flavors are always
vanilla and chocolate, and nearly every year, strawberry comes in third.

It’s the same with white papers. White papers may seem to come in a
bewildering number of varieties, but when you really analyze them, three
main flavors are more popular than any others. And these three basic
flavors of white papers are as easy to tell apart as vanilla,
strawberry, and chocolate ice cream.

Why do you need to know about these three flavors of white papers? For
one thing, if you don’t recognize the distinctions between different
white papers, you may always use the same type, no matter what the
circumstances. As the old saying goes, “When all you have is a hammer,
everything looks like a nail.” But when you understand these
distinctions, you can use different flavors of white papers for
different marketing challenges and target them effectively at B2B buyers
at the top, middle, or bottom of the sales funnel. With this
understanding, you gain more flexibility to deal with a wider range of
marketing challenges.

Another reason to study these three flavors is because when B2B buyers
seek out a white paper, they know which flavor they want. When you
understand how to create each flavor of white paper, you can meet these
expectations and give your target audience what they want.

I call these three flavors of white papers the backgrounder (vanilla),
the numbered list (strawberry), and the problem/solution (chocolate).
Table 5-1 sums up many characteristics of these three flavors. The rest
of this chapter gives you an overview of the three types of papers. In
Chapters 6, 7, and 8, I provide all the details you need to know about
each flavor and how to use it for best results.

[Three Main Flavors of White Papers]

[Three Main Flavors of White Papers]

Zooming in on the product: Plain vanilla

The oldest form of B2B white paper is as predictable and reassuring as
vanilla ice cream. The backgrounder first began as a detailed
description of the features of some industrial widget. The audience for
this flavor was mainly engineers and technicians allergic to any
marketing spin or “fluff” in the content. The earliest versions of these
papers were published by vendors who needed to explain their products in
more detail than they could in a short brochure or data sheet.

This form evolved over the years to cover the business benefits of any
B2B products, and today the backgrounder can just as easily cover any
service or even a methodology or business process.

But the focus is always on the vendor’s offering. A backgrounder usually
goes deep into the guts of a product or service to discuss how it can
outperform, outlast, or undercut the competition. In this white paper,
the product is firmly in the foreground, and the product name is often
in the title.

[remember.eps] A backgrounder is most useful at two points where a
vendor’s message must be extremely clear and crisp:

[check.png] To support the launch of a new product by explaining it to
the vendor’s sales force and channel partners plus any journalists,
analysts, or bloggers who cover that space

[check.png] Near the bottom of the sales funnel, to help a technical
evaluator size up the product or service against the competition

The leading firms in any market often use backgrounders to describe
their offerings. You can find out much more about backgrounders in
Chapter 6, including the pros and cons of this flavor and how to build
and repurpose one for best results.

Making points quickly: Scrumptious strawberry

A second popular flavor of white paper is as light and refreshing as
strawberry ice cream. This white paper is a numbered list built up from
a set of questions, answers, issues, points, or tips about a particular
topic. This format was likely modeled after those magazine articles with
titles like “5 Tips on Getting Better Mileage” or “6 Ways to Keep Weight
Off” or “7 Things to Ask before You Buy Life Insurance.” This flavor
also owes a nod to David Letterman’s Top Ten Lists, a popular fixture on
late night TV since 1985. A list-based approach appeals to anyone who
wants a quick study on some issue, the bottom line on some controversy,
or some inside tips on how to succeed in some area.

Readers appreciate the fact that a numbered list is, by definition,
quick and easy to scan. The framework is clearly visible in the numbered
points themselves, so you don’t have to delve deep to see where it’s
going. This flavor is the fastest and easiest of all to write and the
easiest to reuse as a guest blog or a placed article in a trade journal
or industry website.

[remember.eps]A numbered list works best for three purposes:

[check.png] To get attention with a provocative approach to some issue

[check.png] To cast FUD (fear, uncertainty, and doubt — a classic
marketing technique) on competitors

[check.png] To nurture prospects through the middle of the sales funnel
by keeping them engaged and mildly entertained

This flavor can cover the widest range of topics, including a product,
service, technology, methodology, market, trend, issue, or debate. Just
remember to keep it as light and lively as a dish of strawberry ice
cream. You can find out much more about numbered lists in Chapter 7,
including the pros and cons of this flavor and how to build and
repurpose one for best results.

Finding a solution: Rich chocolate

The third main flavor of white paper is as rich and satisfying as a big
dish of chocolate ice cream — with hot fudge, roasted almonds, whipped
cream, and a cherry on top. This problem/solution white paper describes
a nagging business problem and how to solve it. A white paper in this
flavor has three main parts:

[check.png] The problem

[check.png] The existing solutions and their drawbacks

[check.png] A new, improved solution

The problem can be technical, financial, organizational, or anything
else — as long as it’s big, nasty, and recognized by your target
readers. The existing solutions part rounds up all the conventional ways
to deal with the problem and why none of them are truly satisfactory.
That’s how this flavor sets up and then knocks down all the competition.
The traditional solutions aren’t identified by vendor, but as generic
categories, classes, or genres. Finally, this flavor shows what an ideal
solution to the problem looks like and then — as late as possible in the
document — identifies the vendor and its offering by name as a new,
improved solution to the problem.

A good problem/solution white paper is truly useful to readers because
it helps them see a nagging business problem in a more thoughtful way or
gives them a better understanding that they can apply on the job. This
flavor is the most educational because it explores an industry-wide
problem, not just one vendor’s product or a superficial take on some
issue. Because of all the research and thinking that goes into this
flavor, it’s the most challenging to write. The upside is that the
problem/solution white paper generates the best return on the time and
money invested in it. And it’s the longest lasting, too; many
problem/solution white papers continue to get good results for years.

A problem/solution white paper works best for three purposes:

[check.png] To generate leads at the top of the sales funnel

[check.png] To educate your market

[check.png] To build recognition for your company

You can use a problem/solution white paper to educate your own sales
forces, channel partners, and any analysts, bloggers, and journalists
who cover your space. The whole content of a problem/solution white
paper is driven by facts and logic, not by marketing hype or fluff. When
it’s truly effective, this flavor of white paper delivers all the rich
satisfying taste of a big dish of chocolate ice cream. You can find out
much more about problem/solution white papers in Chapter 8, including
the pros and cons of this flavor and how to build and repurpose one for
best results.

Making two tasty mash-ups

Just as strawberry goes well with either vanilla or chocolate, you can
combine a numbered list with either other flavor of white paper for
tasty results:

[check.png] Numbered list + backgrounder

[check.png] Numbered list + problem/solution

In either case, the liveliness of a numbered list can lighten up and
streamline the more detailed presentation of the other flavor. For
example, a white paper can discuss five key features of a certain
product, combining the liveliness of a numbered list with the many
product details of a backgrounder. Or you can organize a
problem/solution white paper around three questions or three steps,
lightening up the deep research of a problem/solution with the
easy-to-read appeal of a numbered list.

Getting messy with other flavor combinations

Two mash-ups don’t turn out so well. Combining the high-level overview
of a problem/solution with the microscopic focus of a backgrounder is
nearly impossible. Also, consider the purpose of these two flavors: A
problem/solution white paper works best to generate leads at the top of
the sales funnel, while a backgrounder helps support prospects close to
making a buying decision at the bottom of the funnel. How can you
address both ends of the funnel at once? In this case, vanilla and
chocolate don’t mix. Instead, keep these two flavors separate and
produce two distinct white papers aimed at different audiences.

And don’t even think about creating the white paper equivalent of
Neapolitan ice cream: a three-way combo of vanilla, strawberry, and
chocolate. How can you possibly layer a numbered list — ideal for the
middle of the sales funnel — onto the other two flavors? How can one
document possibly engage prospects at the top, middle, and bottom of the
sales funnel all at once? Again, you’re better off separating your
messages into three better-targeted and more effective documents.

[tip.eps] The simplest way to avoid either mess is to just keep the
vanilla away from the chocolate. Neither flavor of white paper mixes
well with the other.

Choosing the Right Flavor

Talking about these three main flavors of white papers and studying
their characteristics is all well and good, but which one do you pick
for your next white paper? How do you find the right tool for the job?
Decisions, decisions.

Actually, deciding which white paper to use isn’t that tricky when you
think about it in three steps:

1. Reflect on the main purpose of your white paper.

2. Consider the preferences of your target audience.

3. Do a reality check on your target sector, industry, or vertical
market. (In other words, ask yourself: Will this be the first white
paper anyone ever used in that sector?)

Although this process may feel a little overwhelming right now, after
you get the hang of it, you’ll find you can pinpoint the best flavor in
just a few minutes. Don’t rush through these steps, though, because
picking the right white paper for the job is a significant decision that
can make or break your results. The following sections outline the steps
in detail.

Reflecting on your purpose

To pick the perfect flavor for your next white paper, the best place to
start is your intended purpose. Your white paper can do one or two
things, but it can’t do everything. If you want to attract fresh leads
at the top of your sales funnel, the same document can’t very likely
help technical evaluators at the bottom of the funnel. Trying to do both
at once only creates a mash-up that doesn’t work (see the earlier
section, “Getting messy with other flavor combinations”).

So, first of all, you need to pick one purpose that’s more important
than any other. For best results, stick to just one. Don’t dilute your
efforts by trying to do two or three different things with one document.
The more you can focus your efforts, the more effective your white paper
will be.

Table 5-2 lists the most common purposes for a white paper and which
flavor works best for that purpose. To use this table, find your main
purpose in the left column, and then look at the options in the right
column. You may see two or more possibilities, any of which can work
nicely. These possibilities become the working options for your white
paper flavor, which you confirm or refine in the next couple of steps.

Table 5-2 The Best White Paper Flavors for Various Purposes

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Purpose                           | Best Flavor(s) to Use             |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Support a product launch.         | Backgrounder                      |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   | Numbered list + backgrounder      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Educate sales force, channel      | Problem/solution                  |
| partners, analysts, bloggers, and |                                   |
| journalists.                      | Numbered list + problem/solution  |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Generate leads at the top of the  | Problem/solution                  |
| funnel.                           |                                   |
|                                   | Numbered list + problem/solution  |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Nurture prospects in the middle   | Numbered list                     |
| of the funnel.                    |                                   |
|                                   | Numbered list + problem/solution  |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Support technical evaluations at  | Backgrounder                      |
| the bottom of the funnel.         |                                   |
|                                   | Numbered list + backgrounder      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Cast FUD on competitors or knock  | Numbered list                     |
| competitors off a shortlist of    |                                   |
| vendors.                          |                                   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Build recognition for your        | Problem/solution                  |
| company.                          |                                   |
|                                   | Numbered list + problem/solution  |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Get attention with provocative    | Numbered list                     |
| views.                            |                                   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

[warning_bomb.eps] Many companies working on their first white paper try
to do too much. They often try to pack everything plus the kitchen sink
into one paper. But publishing three slimmer, more focused documents is
much better than publishing one hulking tome that tries to be everything
to everyone. Besides, when you break down that monster into smaller
pieces, you also get more kicks at the can — two or three chances to
reach your potential readers rather than only one.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

What about “thought leadership”?

Whenever a prospect tells me, “We want to use this white paper to
develop some thought leadership,” I feel like screaming. As a former
hardheaded journalist who read dozens of white papers for background
research, I believe thought leadership is one of the most meaningless
buzzwords ever devised. What is it, exactly? How do you get it? And how
do you measure it to know whether your white paper helped you get more
of it? That’s why I don’t include this term in Table 5-1.

Think for an instant: What is a leader? To me, a leader is the leader of
a company, the head of state for a nation, or the most successful, most
respected, most innovative company in its market. Leaders aren’t shy and
retiring; they’re out there leading parades, giving speeches, and
kissing babies. If your company is already a leader in your industry,
everybody knows it. If not, you can’t just hire a writer to create a
single white paper and “develop some thought leadership.” It’s not going
to happen. More likely, no one will care what you say, and your white
paper will be quickly forgotten. I want to help you avoid that.

In recent years, marketing has evolved from one of the last holdouts
where results weren’t measured in numbers. In the old days, marketers
were measured by how good the company logo looked or how funny the TV
ads were. Today, marketers are held to account for their return on
investment (ROI) on every campaign, and a white paper is no different.
You can account for the number of leads generated, the number of
prospects nurtured, or the total value of sales booked with the help of
a white paper. But how do you account for thought leadership?

Instead of chasing such a vague goal, I urge you to pick a more specific
and achievable goal. At the very end of Table 5-1, you see build
recognition and get attention. These terms are as close as I get to
thought leadership. These goals are synonyms for mindshare, which can
actually be expressed as a number, as in “64 percent of our target
audience has heard of our company.” Admittedly, not all companies take
this kind of survey. But do you know any way to measure thought
leadership? To my mind, thought leadership is a contrived notion that
non-data-driven marketing types use to sound important, hoping no one
will notice what flimsy ground they’re standing on. Don’t fall for it.
Don’t use it as a goal for any white paper — ever.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Considering your target audience

Suppose you’ve already fixed on your unswerving purpose, which has led
you to two possible flavors, one of them a mash-up with a numbered list.
Next, consider the preferences of your target audience. Are they stolid
and conservative 50-ish bean counters, like CFOs? Are you trying to
impress them with how responsible your firm is and why they should deal
with you rather than the other upstarts in your field? Then perhaps
using a provocative tone in a numbered list isn’t the best approach. For
a conservative audience, you may decide instead to aim more for the
factual details of a backgrounder or the dignified tone of a
problem/solution.

On the other hand, what if your target market is mainly young, hip
entrepreneurs running web-based startups, most of them not yet 30? Are
they going to mind some quick tips or a slightly tongue-in-cheek
approach? This audience will more likely appreciate the easy-to-scan
format and the witty tone of a numbered list.

Or you may have other factors to consider. For example, if you’re
writing for doctors, you know they often read articles in medical
journals to learn the findings of complex research projects. For an
audience like this, a numbered list may not provide the scientific rigor
they’re looking for. You may even want to format your white paper more
like a journal article than a business document. I’ve done that a few
times.

[remember.eps] In any case, use your understanding of your target
audience to help narrow down your choices. Most important, decide
whether your audience is likely to appreciate a numbered list.

Thinking about your target sector

For a final reality check on your decision, consider your target sector,
industry, or vertical market. Ask yourself whether readers in this field
are used to seeing the white paper flavor that you’re thinking of
creating for them. One way to check is to look at what your competitors
are doing with white papers. Are the key players in your market all
publishing the same flavor? Look at analysts, associations, consultants,
and trade journals that publish white papers for your industry. What
flavors predominate on their sites? You can follow the herd and use the
common flavor (not necessarily a bad thing), or you can break away from
the pack and shake things up a bit by choosing a less-common flavor for
your white paper.

For example, certain vertical markets, such as finance, government,
healthcare, insurance, and security, tend to be quite staid and
conservative. After all, a key preoccupation in these industries is to
protect their customers’ money, health, or physical security. For
industries like those, you can always use a numbered list with more
serious content and dial down its informal tone. Or, if you want to be
seen as an innovative vendor that pushes the envelope, you may
deliberately decide to publish a different flavor with a more cheeky
tone to help your firm get noticed. Just do a little homework first to
make sure you’re not going in a direction that’s really out of sync with
your target sector.

Choosing between a pure flavor and a mash-up

But what if your choice comes down to one pure flavor and one mash-up of
that flavor plus a numbered list? How do you decide between them? Let
your content drive that decision. If a numbered list doesn’t emerge
naturally from your material, don’t try to force it; stick with the
backgrounder or problem/solution. However, you can easily try out some
ideas for numbered lists to see whether they make sense.

For example, suppose your white paper is all about automated parking
meters on city streets. You want to show how using these meters saves a
lot of money versus paying parking meter collectors; how they’re more
convenient because they enable people to pay by using debit and credit
cards; how they reduce crime and shrinkage because no one is carting
around hundreds of dollars’ worth of change; and how they’re a proven
technology that many cities already use. In short, many good reasons
support using automated parking meters. Do you think this content would
be a good case for a numbered list? Of course it would! You already have
four good points here, and coming up with another three or four would
likely be easy. This example shows how a numbered list can naturally
emerge from your content.

In fact, I can already start to glimpse three possible angles:

[check.png] “8 Benefits of Automated Parking Meters” would be a pure
numbered list, showing eight points in a straightforward, easy-to-scan
format.

[check.png] “7 Questions to Ask Your Automated Parking Vendor” would be
a backgrounder–numbered list, highlighting seven strengths of this one
vendor’s automated meter products and casting FUD on all competitors.

[check.png] “6 Ways Automated Parking Helps Municipalities Avoid Budget
Crunches” would be a problem/solution–numbered list, where the problem
is that cities are facing tight budgets, and the new, improved solution
is the cost savings and higher revenues that automated parking meters
can help generate.

Depending on the purpose and audience for your white paper, and where
they are in the sales funnel, you can pick one of these possibilities or
continue to tweak your ideas until you have one that works better than
any other.

Figuring out what to do if your idea doesn’t fit any flavor

These 3 flavors and 2 tasty mash-ups will probably fit 9 out of 10 —
even 19 out of 20 — white papers that you’re likely to encounter or need
to create. What about that weird outlier, that 5 percent that doesn’t
fit any of these flavors? All I can say is, don’t sweat it. These three
flavors aren’t intended as ironclad categories. To paraphrase Captain
Barbossa from the Pirates of the Caribbean movie, these three flavors
are more what you’d call guidelines. Feel free to mix up another flavor
if you need something different to reach your target audience.

[remember.eps] You can create a white paper about any topic, for any
audience, using any approach under the sun, as long as you remember this
key mantra: A truly effective white paper helps business people
understand an issue, solve a problem, or make a decision. If your
content does all of that, your readers will thank you — and they won’t
give a hoot what flavor you call it.

Developing Your Topic

Beyond picking the best flavor to achieve your purpose and reach your
target audience, you need an engaging topic. Likely, you already have
some inkling of a good topic or perhaps a set of topics that you can
develop into white papers. The short example on automated parking meters
(in the “Choosing between a pure flavor and a mash-up” section) hints at
the process for focusing your topic. Again, go back to your purpose,
your audience, their sector, and the half-baked ideas you already
identified. Which of these would accomplish your purpose best? Which
would reflect best on your company? Which would be freshest, most
unusual, and most helpful? In the following sections, I help you narrow
down your topic.

Sizing up your ideas

One thing to watch out for is picking an idea that’s either too big or
too small. You want to focus on something you can cover in about 5 to 12
pages, depending on the type of white paper you’re writing.

For example, an idea that’s really too big for one white paper is “How
Cities Can Solve Their Budget Crises,” which probably calls for
congressional hearings and a report thousands of pages thick. The flip
side of this topic is one that’s just too small for a white paper, such
as “How to Position Automated Parking Meters on City Streets.” This
topic sounds more like a section from an installation manual or perhaps
a blog post, probably not an idea that justifies putting together a six-
to eight-page white paper. Just like Goldilocks, you need to find an
idea for your white paper that’s not too big, not too small, but just
the right size.

Giving readers something new

A truly effective white paper helps readers gain a better overview of an
issue, provides helpful insights on how to solve a problem, or gives
useful pointers on how to make an important decision. You want to avoid
any ideas that have already been done to death, covered repeatedly by
sources such as trade magazines, industry associations, and other
vendors. You don’t want to rehash the same tired material as everyone
else. No one gets excited about a white paper on the same topic as one
they read two years ago. Even if prospects start reading your paper, if
you don’t give them a fresh take on a topic or something new, useful,
and educational, they’re bound to be disappointed.

The surest sign of a floundering marketing team is a “Me Too!” white
paper on the same topic everyone else is writing about, a document that
adds nothing to the literature and casts no new light on the issues.
Some vendors are so uninspired that they steal white paper ideas — and
sometimes whole chunks of text — from competitors. (Of course, no one
reading this book has ever done anything like that!) For people who take
such a lazy approach, all their effort will likely come to naught. Truly
creative, inspired, turned-on marketers have more ideas than they can
ever possibly implement.

[tip.eps] You can quickly check how much has already been published in
the same area by Googling a few phrases close to your working topic. In
fact, doing so is a great way to get some preliminary research and find
some initial sources that you may be able to quote in your white paper.
Don’t wait until you’re in the formal research stage; do some web
searches early on, while you’re still shaping your idea.

[truestory_property.eps] A client once asked me to review a white paper
published in Europe that it was considering republishing in North
America. Unfortunately, the topic — how to pick an enterprise resource
planning (ERP) system — was extremely old hat. Twenty years ago, this
topic would have interested a great many business people. But ERP is now
a very mature type of enterprise software. If you Google “how to pick an
ERP system” you get 16-plus million hits! I was forced to tell my client
that he shouldn’t bother with such a tired topic for a white paper. The
client wasn’t happy about that because he had no other ideas and no
budget to develop any. But he had to admit I was right.

Getting ideas from prospects and clients

If you’re stuck for ideas, you can always turn to a ready source: anyone
in your company who talks directly to prospects or clients. For most
companies, that includes the sales force, channel partners, customer
service, technical support, and possibly marketing. Sit down with a few
of these people and ask them some simple questions: What are the
prospects and clients you deal with asking about? What are they curious
about? What big problems are they grappling with? What do they need help
with? Listen carefully to the answers, and you’ll hear some rich topics
for possible white papers.

What’s more, this conversation doesn’t have to be a one-way street. If
you have a customer advisory board, user group, focus group panel, or
any other way of getting hold of some typical prospects or customers,
try out some possible white paper topics on them.

OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 6

The Backgrounder: As Basic As Vanilla

In This Chapter

[arrow] Getting to know the original flavor of white papers

[arrow] Figuring out when to use a backgrounder

[arrow] Defining the strengths and weaknesses of a backgrounder

[arrow] Planning the typical contents of a backgrounder

[arrow] Using graphics and rich media in a backgrounder

[arrow] Recycling a backgrounder into other formats

To delve deeper into the three flavors of white papers that I outline in
Chapter 5, the natural starting point is the backgrounder. This flavor
is as plain and predictable as vanilla ice cream. But just like vanilla,
it’s amazingly popular. For example, all the leading technology
companies with household names like Apple, Google, Hewlett-Packard,
Oracle, and so on produce mainly this flavor.

In this chapter, I define this original flavor of white paper, show how
to recognize it, and reveal when to use it for best results. Then I
sketch in the pros and cons of backgrounders and provide a sample list
of contents and recommended page counts. I also cover how to repurpose a
backgrounder into other types of content, especially a press release,
slide deck, demo, or webinar.

Introducing the Granddaddy of All White Papers

You don’t get any surprises when you order vanilla ice cream. The same
applies to a backgrounder. Your readers know what to expect when they
pick up a white paper of this flavor. You can think of the backgrounder
as a “deep dish” about the features and benefits of a certain product or
service. Best used for prospects near the bottom of the sales funnel, a
backgrounder pitches the technical or business benefits of a vendor’s
offering.

To many marketing executives, the backgrounder is what white papers are
all about. Once upon a time, all B2B white papers came in this flavor.
In those days, white papers were used mainly to deliver technical
information to prospects. By now, marketing has come a long way, B2B
buyers have evolved, and new flavors have emerged that are better suited
for certain marketing challenges. But a backgrounder can still be
powerful if you use it at the right time for the right purpose.

In the following sections, I explore the ins and outs of the
backgrounder, including how to spot one and why certain B2B buyers like
this flavor best.

Defining a backgrounder

A backgrounder is a B2B white paper with a tight focus on one offering
from one vendor. This offering is most often a product or service, but
it can also be any sort of methodology or business process. The
backgrounder is also known as an evaluator’s guide or product briefing.

A backgrounder does one or more of the following:

[check.png] Explains the key features, functions, and benefits of an
offering to give B2B buyers more detailed information than they can find
in a brochure, data sheet, or website

[check.png] Explains a new, unfamiliar, or misunderstood technology to a
technical audience

[check.png] Supports a product launch by explaining a new offering to
the world

[remember.eps] Prospects deep in the sales funnel download product
backgrounders to get technical details they can’t find anywhere else.
They don’t want brochure-style copy; they’re looking for precise
technical details. But they don’t want 120-page operations manuals,
either. The trick is to be selective and hit the high points without
getting bogged down in arcane details that matter only to your own
engineers, not to your prospective buyers.

A backgrounder is relatively easy to prepare because it includes mostly
technical information that’s easy to find within your own company. The
tone is factual, and the graphics can be simple boxes and arrows. (No
need for special effects; “all we want are the facts, ma’am.”) If you
think vanilla when you think of a backgrounder, you can’t go far wrong.

Spotting a backgrounder

To identify a backgrounder, look for a product or service name in the
title and a lot of information about that offering in the body. In fact,
the actual name of the product or service likely occurs dozens of times,
often more than once a page. Also look for descriptions of proprietary
features, functions, interfaces, methodologies, modules, technologies,
workflows — the kind of technical details that used to be called feeds
and speeds. If you see all of that, you can be sure that you’ve spotted
a backgrounder.

You won’t likely find much discussion of any industry-wide problem or
much attempt to point out the drawbacks of any other vendor’s solution
to that problem. You won’t find any levity, provocative language, or
trash-talking about the competition. And you won’t see many question
marks in the title or section headings. A backgrounder is all about
facts, figures, throughput, total cost of ownership, return on
investment, new features and innovations, and how that offering does
what it does better than anything else on the market.

Understanding this flavor’s appeal to sales and marketing types

Backgrounders appeal to sales and marketing types within a company for
an obvious reason: They mirror the way these people usually think,
focusing on their company’s offering and how it’s the best thing on the
market. A backgrounder highlights the unique selling points (USPs) and
competitive advantages that they’re always talking about. The first
instinct of most sales and marketing people who’ve never worked on a
white paper before is to create a backgrounder. Because it’s what they
know, it’s the most natural flavor to use.

Of course, this instinct isn’t always correct. Sometimes a backgrounder
is the right flavor to use; other times, not so much. In the next
section, I describe three specific situations where a backgrounder can
work very well. In any other circumstances, think twice before you pick
this flavor — even if you have to push back against other people in your
company. The white paper you save may be your own.

Deciding When to Use a Backgrounder

To me, nothing is like a scoop of vanilla ice cream melting all over a
big piece of fresh-from-the-oven strawberry-rhubarb crumble — unless
you’re talking a double scoop of vanilla melting over a big piece of
warm pumpkin pie. No doubt you have your own favorite ways of eating
vanilla ice cream.

In the same way, a backgrounder can be the best flavor to pick in three
specific situations:

[check.png] To promote an undisputed leader

[check.png] To support a technical evaluation

[check.png] To supplement a new product launch

Promoting an undisputed leader

Is your company an undisputed leader in your field? Are you working for
a Fortune 500 company that’s a name brand already lodged firmly in every
prospect’s mind? Are you so well known that you usually end up on the
shortlist of B2B vendors being considered for any purchase in your
market?

If so, you’re among the fortunate few, including companies in B2B
technology, such as Cisco, Dell, Hewlett-Packard, and IBM; in software,
Adobe, Microsoft, Oracle, SAP, and Symantec; in telecom, AT&T, Sprint,
and Verizon. Every sector of the economy has a few leading lights — the
powerful standout companies that everyone knows.

For this select number, publishing backgrounders makes a lot of sense,
because most B2B buyers naturally check out what these firms can offer
to help them with their business problem. In many cases, all that one of
these big, well-known companies has to do is lay out its wares and wait
for the prospects to flock to them, like children around an ice-cream
truck. And the best way for a well-known B2B company to lay out its
wares is often by publishing a vanilla flavor of white paper, a
backgrounder.

Supporting a technical evaluation

As explained in Chapter 1, you can look at the sales process as a
funnel. During a complex B2B sale, prospects enter the sales funnel at
the top, gain the information and reassurance they need in the middle,
and ultimately make a buying decision at the bottom. Throughout the
process, every vendor competes against the rest to win the buyer’s
business.

A backgrounder isn’t effective at generating leads at the top of the
funnel and is only mildly effective for nurturing prospects through the
middle, simply because it’s too early in either case for B2B buyers to
think about any product specifics. They’re still mapping out their
requirements, formulating a budget and a timeline, and getting everyone
on the selection committee to agree on a shortlist of vendors.

But when prospects finally reach the bottom of the funnel and want to do
a final evaluation of their shortlist of vendors, a backgrounder can be
just the ticket. Often, a knowledgeable staff person on the prospect’s
side is assigned to evaluate a handful of competing solutions, weigh
them against one another, and come back with some recommendations. A
backgrounder packed with details on the technical and business benefits
of a vendor’s offering gives that person exactly what he needs when he
needs it. At that point, you can imagine how much a vendor with a
backgrounder gains over those without. In fact, any vendors with no
explanatory white papers may find themselves dropped from the shortlist
of possible suppliers.

Supplementing a product launch

A backgrounder can be useful to round out a product launch when a vendor
needs to explain a new offering to analysts, bloggers, channel partners,
journalists, and perhaps even its own sales force. This is the one time
when you can expect a certain amount of interest in the product itself,
especially if the new product or service represents a departure from
conventional approaches or any significant improvements on the past. A
backgrounder can focus on what’s new and how this product or service
delivers more benefits for B2B buyers.

[tip.eps] If your company is launching a product or service in a new
category, with a new approach, or anything a little unconventional,
publishing a backgrounder to support it is a good idea, no matter how
big or small your company may be. You can also publish a white paper of
another flavor at the same time, but to help tell the story of your new
offering, you should likely create a backgrounder.

Looking at the Pros and Cons of Backgrounders

Nothing in this life is perfect, and the same applies to white papers.
Like every flavor, backgrounders have certain strengths and limitations.
On the plus side, because backgrounders are so focused, they’re
relatively easy to research and write. On the downside, they have a
short life span and aren’t effective at generating leads. Understanding
the pros and cons of this flavor, which I address in the following
sections, helps you decide when you should use a backgrounder for best
results and when to choose another flavor that’s a better match for the
challenge you face.

Pro: Easy to research

A backgrounder is the easiest of all flavors to research, mainly because
all your sources are already inside the company. Everyone you need to
line up as a subject matter expert (SME) and all the material you need
to gather comes from inside the company — most likely from the team that
designed and created the product or service in the first place. When you
speak to those experts, they’ll tell you about what they know best: the
features, functions, philosophy, and benefits of the offering they just
created. In a short time, they can dish out more source materials,
including all sorts of market research, slide decks, product plans, and
use cases about that offering, than you can possibly use.

For a backgrounder, you won’t likely have to do any web searching,
compile any external research, or keep track of any footnotes. Of
course, you still have to gather the facts you need to present the
offering in a compelling way, but your research should be clear and
straightforward. That makes a backgrounder the easiest of any flavor to
research.

Pro: Easy to write

A backgrounder can be quite easy to write because it has a simple
structure and a tight focus. The structure of a backgrounder is pretty
straightforward:

[check.png] Here’s the offering.

[check.png] Here are the key features.

[check.png] Here’s how these features can benefit you.

[check.png] Call us if you want to talk.

You may want to do an entire backgrounder about one specific aspect of
an offering, such as security, robustness, total cost of ownership, or
whatever. In this case, you can arrange the list of features into some
sort of logical pattern so that each one builds on what you discuss
earlier in the paper.

Or a backgrounder can take the opposite approach with a modular
structure. With this approach, when you cover four discrete features and
their benefits, you don’t have to link them all together into a grand
design, with each point following logically from the one before; you can
just talk about one, another one, the next, and then the last.

With either approach, you should arrange your points in logical order,
starting and ending your list with strong, memorable features. If you
have one or two less-exciting features, tuck those into the middle to
de-emphasize them. Beyond that, there’s no trick to writing a
backgrounder. Just stick to the facts and explain the offering in clear
terms.

Con: Short-lived

Of course, any document tied so intimately to a specific product has a
limited shelf life, roughly equivalent to the life span of that release,
version, or model. As soon as the product or service changes or gets an
update, the white paper may be out of date. At that point, long after
the initial excitement of the launch, justifying the resources to update
and rerelease that white paper may not be easy. You may have more
interesting marketing tactics that you can use to promote the new
version of the product, especially if it’s now at a mature point in its
lifecycle or no longer considered different or unconventional. You may
as well expect a backgrounder used at a product launch to have a short
life span, about as long as that product generates any initial buzz.
After that, it may be time for that document to go to that big recycling
box in the sky.

Con: Not good for generating leads

Using a backgrounder can be tempting in certain situations where it’s
not the wisest choice, such as when trying to generate leads. Some sales
and marketing people may be tempted to say, “If we just tell people how
great our technology is, they’ll want to buy it!” But this flawed
thinking doesn’t match how most B2B buyers operate in the real world.

In fact, using a backgrounder to generate leads is like dipping into an
almost empty tub of ice cream: You’re just not going to come up with
much. The only prospects likely to encounter a backgrounder are the ones
already exploring your offering by name. Whenever I interview executives
from white paper content networks, like KnowledgeStorm or TechTarget,
they confirm that mentioning a product name in a white paper title
dramatically cuts downloads, generally by 50 percent or more. That’s
because most prospects aren’t looking for this flavor of white paper.
They know backgrounders are completely focused on the nitty-gritty
details of one specific product, not on an overview of the particular
business problem they’re grappling with. And they know any white paper
with a product name in the title is likely a backgrounder.

Think about how B2B buyers actually encounter your white paper. Any
prospects low in the sales funnel who already know your product by name
and who search on your website for more information may well find your
backgrounder. But this number touches only a tiny fraction of your
universe of possible buyers. What about all the other prospects out
there who don’t know your product by name or aren’t even in your funnel
yet?

Many more B2B prospects at the top of the sales funnel search the web
for the solution to a nagging problem or for help understanding an
issue. Because a backgrounder doesn’t answer these questions, the
majority of your prospects never encounter it in their search engine
results and never know it exists. That’s why a backgrounder just doesn’t
draw many prospects into the top of the funnel where leads are
generated. If you try to use one for that purpose, you’ll likely be
disappointed.

[warning_bomb.eps] If your company is an industry leader that doesn’t
have to work hard to attract prospects, the backgrounder can be an ideal
white paper. Smaller vendors, be warned: If your firm has to work hard
to attract recognition and if you’re seeking to generate as many leads
as possible, don’t use a backgrounder to achieve those goals. You can
get much better results from a problem/solution white paper (which I
discuss in Chapter 8) or even a numbered list (which I cover in Chapter
7).

Planning a Backgrounder

Publishing any white paper involves three major phases: planning,
producing, and promoting. Parts III and IV of this book go into each of
these phases in great detail, even breaking them down into a
step-by-step plan. This section covers key areas in planning a
backgrounder, namely the following:

[check.png] Gathering the essential information you need

[check.png] Allocating pages

[check.png] Choosing an appropriate title

[check.png] Setting the right tone

Gathering essential information

This section is all about the background you need for your backgrounder.
(I could get all postmodern about that, but I’ll restrain myself.) In
any case, you need to know five key things to help plan an effective
backgrounder:

[check.png] Your intended reader(s)

[check.png] The purpose of the backgrounder

[check.png] The key features of the offering

[check.png] The key benefits of each feature

[check.png] The call to action at the end

The following sections discuss each of these items in turn. Until you
uncover these items and make a plan for your backgrounder, don’t even
think about starting to write. You write during Phase 2 (see Chapter 13)
when you actually produce your white paper.

Your intended reader(s)

To help target your backgrounder to the right audience, identify your
ideal reader as specifically as possible. You can use the following four
categories to help specify your target readers:

[check.png] Company: Find some sense of the size, vertical market or
sector, and location of the company where your intended reader works.
For example, your reader may work at a Fortune 500 company in the
Midwest that makes finished wood products, like doors and windows.

[check.png] Demographics: Dig up hard facts, such as the age, sex,
education, and job title(s), of your target readers. For example, your
readers could be C-level executives in their 50s, most often male with
engineering degrees or MBAs. To find these kinds of facts, ask your
sales, marketing, customer service, or technical support teams, or
anyone else who has daily contact with your actual customers.

[check.png] Psychographics: Sketch in some of your target audience’s
attitudes, such as their experience, interest in your offering, and
workaday stress. For example, your readers could be aware that their
teams are drowning in paper but skeptical of hardware solutions and not
keen to make any new capital expenditures. Because everyone is
different, your guesstimates here may be all over the map. That’s okay,
because thinking about these things is better than remaining blissfully
ignorant of them.

[check.png] Technographics: Imagine how your target readers will likely
access the backgrounder — whether through a desktop, laptop, tablet, or
mobile device. For example, you may assume that 80 percent of your
target executives never leave their office until they’re done working
for the day and don’t own an iPad or any other kind of tablet; in other
words, the vast majority of your target readers will view your white
paper on a desktop or as a printout. If you really have no idea, it’s
probably fair to say that some will use each class of device.

[remember.eps] The main difference between a desktop, laptop, tablet, or
mobile device is that each device has a smaller screen than the one
before it, so someone reading your white paper on a desktop with a large
screen has a much different page view than someone reading from his
mobile phone.

[tip.eps] Remind your white paper designer of these technographics
during the design phase. Knowing how readers will likely view your white
paper on-screen may well affect how the designer formats the pages, how
many columns and graphics he uses, the colors he chooses, and so on.

If you have any secondary audiences — those who have the backgrounder
passed along to them or are desirable but not essential readers — define
them as well. For example, your secondary readers may be female
department managers in their 30s and 40s whose teams are buried in paper
files and forms. You may consider these readers secondary because
they’re not in a position to buy from your company, but they may be in
an ideal position to recommend a purchase to help solve their
department’s problems.

The purpose of the backgrounder

You must have a clear goal you want to achieve with your white paper. Do
you want to support an evaluation? Train your sales force or channel
partners? Knock a competitor off a buyer’s shortlist of vendors? Help
close sales? Note that “generate leads” isn’t on this list because a
backgrounder isn’t the best at attracting new prospects. Your white
paper can do one thing, but it can’t do everything.

The key features of the offering

List the most unique and powerful features of the offering in some
purposeful order, such as from the most important to the least, the most
familiar to the least, the newest to oldest, by workflow, or by some
other scheme. Don’t try to cover everything in one backgrounder. You’re
not creating a specification or manual that provides a definitive list
of everything the product can do. Be selective. Four to six features are
often plenty.

In fact, some backgrounders are built around a single feature. And some
describe a bundle of features related to one function, such as security,
workflow, or whatever. Note that you don’t have to dig down into the
details of any feature at this point; you just need to put together an
initial working list of the features you intend to cover in your
backgrounder.

The key benefits of each feature

Features without benefits have little appeal. Not every reader can
visualize how each raw feature can help in his environment. To make your
backgrounder more persuasive, describe the benefits for every key
feature slanted toward your target audience(s). One way to make benefits
clear is to introduce a running example, perhaps a fictitious company
like Acme Scanners, as I do in this book. For enterprise software, you
can even show dummy data from Acme in every screenshot.

The call to action at the end

What do you want your ideal readers to do after they read your document?
Don’t simply send people to your home page to wander aimlessly. Instead,
send them to a specific landing page. Point them to a short presentation
or demo. Invite them to use an interactive calculator. Have them call a
toll-free number or request a free trial. In general, the more specific
the call to action, the more effective it will be and the easier it is
to measure the results.

Allocating pages

This section describes the typical contents most often included in a
backgrounder in the recommended order. As shown in Figure 6-1, a
backgrounder is typically eight or more pages, not counting an optional
cover and executive summary. A backgrounder can even run 25 or 30 pages
without losing any readers, as long as all the material hangs together
and provides useful, factual information without a spec of marketing
fluff.

[remember.eps] A backgrounder can run longer than any other flavor,
mainly because of its role at the bottom of the sales funnel. After all,
if an engineer or technician is told to evaluate a product for possible
purchase and he gets his teeth into a good product description with lots
of technical details, he likely won’t complain that the document is too
long when he reaches the ninth page.

[9781118496923-fg0601.eps]

Illustration by Wiley, Composition Services Graphics

Figure 6-1: The typical page count for a backgrounder is 8+ pages plus
an optional cover.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Knowing your target readers

The first rule of any good communicator is to know your audience. Having
a clear idea of the age, sex, education, job role, size of company,
industry, location, experience, interest, stresses, and viewing devices
of your ideal target readers gives you a better shot at reaching them
with language and imagery that resonates with them.

For example, many men in business — especially old-school men —
appreciate the language of combat and sports: bashing, crushing,
defeating, stomping, winning, and so on. But to many women, these
metaphors are a complete turnoff. Worse yet, people from other cultures
may not even know what you mean by football or NASCAR. If you know in
advance, for example, that 50 percent of your audience for a
backgrounder are women in Europe, would you still use that same
language? Or would you appreciate the chance to find another frame of
reference?

Another even simpler example is readability. People’s eyes begin to
change around age 40. As most people get older, they find it harder to
resolve small print. So your designer should be aware of the intended
age of your audience. If your readers are all 20-something, you can
probably get away with gray text at a smaller point size. But if they’re
all 50-something executives, your designer should pump up the point size
and make all the text crisp black on white.

Knowing your audience isn’t about being sexist and ageist; it’s about
having a better clue of how to tailor your message to make it easy to
decipher and understand.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

A backgrounder, like all white papers, includes three parts: front
matter, main body, and back matter. The following lists discuss briefly
what to include in each part of a backgrounder and how many pages each
should run. For more tips and discussion, see Chapter 10. You can also
check out sample backgrounders at
www.thatwhitepaperguy.com/sample-white-papers.html.

Front matter: One to three pages

The front matter of a backgrounder shows what your paper is about and
how it’s structured and includes the following elements:

[check.png] A cover page is optional in a backgrounder, and you can
often combine the cover with the contents and copyright page. A
text-only cover page shows the title, subtitle (if any), vendor, and
sometimes the date the paper was published. You can include all this
info in a few lines of text or expand it typographically to fill an
entire page. Some backgrounders have visual covers, with a photo of the
offering in action, the intended reader, or something else that suggests
the contents.

[check.png] The contents and copyright sections often appear on the same
page, sometimes with the cover page. The contents section provides a
quick overview of your document that many readers use to skip to the
pages they want. It usually takes up about half a page, certainly no
more than one page. In the contents, you typically list the main
headings and perhaps the secondary headings, if any. In a longer
document, you may want to list all the tables and figures; in a shorter
one, you can leave them out. You can then tuck your copyright notice at
the bottom. Legal teams from most vendors want to insert a disclaimer
along with the copyright notice. Work with them to keep it short and
sweet.

[check.png] An executive summary is optional in this flavor and serves
to “tell them what you’re going to tell them.” In a longer backgrounder,
you may want to sum up the whole paper in just a few paragraphs at the
start to help readers scan or cut-and-paste from your overview. In a
shorter backgrounder, no executive summary may be needed, especially if
the list of contents shows clearly what’s covered in the paper.

Main body: Five or more pages

Here’s where you get to the tastiest bits of the backgrounder, including
the following:

[check.png] The introduction sketches in the intended audience, the
scope of the white paper, and the level of technical detail throughout
and points to any other related documents from the same vendor or
elsewhere. The introduction should take up about one page. If you
include an executive summary in the front matter, you may not need an
introduction, but some backgrounders have both.

[check.png] The features and benefits of the offering itself should span
at least four pages of meaty content; otherwise, your backgrounder will
be too short to look like much of a white paper. Describe each feature
in as much detail as required, and translate each feature into a benefit
that your target audience can appreciate. Benefits make any backgrounder
much more persuasive than a mere list of technical features because they
link the abstract to the concrete, the technical to the real world. In
the features and benefits section, you deliver the key messages of the
white paper, or in other words, you “tell them.”

[remember.eps] The best strategy is to stick to the facts and prove your
assertions with benchmarks or test results, industry awards, reviews, or
comments from acknowledged experts. If you have any such sources to
reference, include them either as footnotes at the bottom of the page or
endnotes gathered together on a separate page at the back of the white
paper.

Back matter: Two pages

The back matter wraps up all the helpful info in the earlier sections
with the following elements:

[check.png] A brief set of conclusions, no more than half a page, rounds
out a backgrounder nicely and “tells them what you told them.” The
conclusions should cover the take-away messages that you want all
readers to remember.

[check.png] At the very end of the conclusions, include your call to
action — the next step you want your ideal readers to take. It can be as
short as a single sentence.

[check.png] Nearly every backgrounder features a brief section about the
company to show the standard boilerplate from the vendor. Include
company contact information here.

Choosing an effective title

Unlike other flavors of white papers, mentioning a product, service, or
company name in the title of a backgrounder is acceptable. In fact, it’s
hard not to. If you have a large product family, you can specify a
certain model or model range in the title to avoid confusion. Beyond
that, a good title clearly conveys the contents of the white paper, the
audience, and the benefits of reading it.

Here are some possible formats for a backgrounder title:

[check.png] How the Acme ScanOMatic 3000 Provides Network Security

[check.png] Evaluator’s Guide for the Acme ScanOMatic 3000

[check.png] Product Briefing: Acme ScanOMatic 3000

[check.png] Unattended Scanning with the ScanOMatic 3000

Another useful tactic is to use a subtitle to name the ideal reader’s
job title or industry that clearly indicates who the backgrounder is
aimed at, such as “A White Paper for CFOs from Acme.”

You don’t have to finalize your title during the planning stage of your
backgrounder, but having a working title is useful to bandy about the
office, especially if your team routinely works on more than one white
paper at a time. If nothing else, you can call this something generic,
like “that backgrounder on the ScanOMatic 3000,” or a tad more specific,
like “that backgrounder on unattended scanning with the 3000.”

Setting a factual tone

If you had to come up with just one word to describe the tone of a
backgrounder, that word would be factual. On every page of your
backgrounder, make sure the text is clear, crisp, and accurate. You
don’t need a lot of flowery language or adjectives in this flavor.
You’re describing a product or service that exists now, designed for a
certain purpose, and aimed at a certain target market. That offering has
certain features, and each feature has an intended benefit. Where’s the
need for any hot air? Just describe what’s there and what it does, using
plain English and industry-standard names for various items. And when
you claim a benefit, don’t be outlandish.

Here’s another reason to be factual: Your white paper is going out in
the world to represent your company. If you try to trick your readers,
obscure the facts, or make claims you can’t substantiate, that reflects
poorly on your company. Part of the task of a technical evaluator is to
sniff out the specific strengths and weaknesses of any offering, true.
But another part of his work is to form an impression of the various
vendors on his shortlist.

Suppose an engineer reports back on his research like this, “Well, Acme
has okay products, but the company makes a habit of exaggerating its
performance. The white paper on the ScanOMatic 3000 makes some awfully
dubious statements that it doesn’t back up. I’m not sure we can really
trust this company.” Imagine the reception from the buying committee:
Raised eyebrows, puzzled frowns, and likely a thick black line through
Acme’s name as they cut it from the shortlist. That’s not what you want!

[remember.eps] Most of all, remember your audience. For a product
launch, your audience includes your channel partners and the journalists
and analysts who cover your space. For a technical evaluation, your
audience includes technicians and engineers trying to size up your
offering. These people are all trained skeptics who can see through any
smoke screen you can possibly throw up. So keep the tone in your
backgrounder factual, clear, and informative. Your readers will
appreciate it.

Going Beyond Text in a Backgrounder

Besides having clear, crisp, and factual text, most backgrounders
benefit from graphics to help convey detailed information about a vendor
offering. Every white paper needs at least one good concept graphic to
show an overview of the key points in a way that’s easy to scan and
simple to remember. In the future, you can expect to see more rich
media, like animation, audio, and video, in backgrounders, although this
flavor may well be the last one where these become commonplace. In the
following sections, I discuss both types of added visuals: graphics and
rich media.

Adding graphics

Most backgrounders include at least a few graphics to help explain the
content. Although black-and-white graphics are acceptable, the added
contrast and emphasis of color is always nice. Either way, graphics in a
backgrounder must be clear and simple. You can choose from block
diagrams, flow diagrams, network diagrams, screenshots of software
products, actual photos of a hardware product, or anything else that
communicates a significant idea at a glance.

[remember.eps] Not all white papers are printed, and of those that are,
not all are printed in color. Test-print your final PDF in black and
white to see how the color looks that way. If you use colors that are
too close in tone or density, they may look the same in black and white.
Where those colors are significant, like in a pie chart, not being able
to tell them apart in black and white can be irritating. If you see this
happening in your test printout, go back to the graphics and change one
or more colors to make them easier to tell apart in black and white.

Don’t just take whatever graphics the engineers give you and plunk them
into your backgrounder. Many engineering-style diagrams are disasters
that don’t give up their messages without 20 minutes of scrutiny. Can
you really expect that much effort from any reader of your backgrounder?
Expect to edit every graphic the same way you edit text to make it more
comprehensible and easier to scan for your target audience. In fact, you
may need to use an original image from an engineer as the starting point
to create a simpler diagram for your readers.

[tip.eps] To fix a drawing that’s too dense, try to separate the various
messages into two or three separate graphics and use each one at the
appropriate place, or not at all. Or see whether you can drop two-thirds
of the information packed into one graphic so that what’s left makes a
useful illustration.

A backgrounder isn’t the place for any fancy, overproduced graphics.
Many engineers distrust anything that looks too “slick.” And you don’t
want to include any “smug shots” of happy business people working
together in peace and harmony; these images give your whole paper an
aura of fakeness, which isn’t what you want. Instead, you want all the
graphics in a backgrounder to say, “Here’s our product out there working
in the real world!”

[tip.eps] To find out more about the types of graphics and how to use
them, check out Visipedia from the graphic software publisher SmartDraw
at www.smartdraw.com/resources/glossary.

Using rich media

Using rich media, like animation, audio, or video, in a backgrounder
isn’t yet a common practice, as I explain in Chapter 3. Rich media will
likely become more common in backgrounders over the next few years, but
if you can’t use it today, don’t worry. The last thing you want in your
backgrounder is anything that looks gimmicky.

Several reasons contribute to the slow uptake of rich media in
backgrounders. To start, rich media hasn’t yet become an industry
standard in B2B marketing, so few white paper sponsors or creators even
think of using it. Backgrounders are generally prepared by using the
media assets, like graphics and slide decks, that a vendor already has
on hand. If a vendor has no rich media suitable for a backgrounder, no
one will likely create it just for this purpose. Also, rich media can
swell the size of a PDF so it takes longer to download, which everyone
wants to avoid.

Finally, consider the essence of a backgrounder. It’s the oldest and
probably most conservative of all flavors. A backgrounder with rich
media is like a dish of vanilla ice cream with gooey caramel sauce and
colorful sprinkles on top. Why would people pick vanilla if they’re
really after something as exciting as all of that?

Repurposing a Backgrounder

One way to get a better return on your investment in a white paper is to
repurpose that content in other formats. Because a backgrounder is
already focused on a particular product or service, you can usually
repurpose it handily as a press release, slide deck, product demo, or
webinar, as I explain in the following sections.

However, simply repurposing this content never changes its intended
audience. No matter what format you use to present a backgrounder, it
will only interest prospects near the bottom of the sales funnel. It
won’t work well as a webinar or in any other format intended to attract
leads at the top of the funnel.

Press release

You can repurpose a backgrounder as a press release when the product is
first launched and still has a certain amount of news value. At the
start, a press release should position the product in its market space
and describe the significance of the offering. After that, it can
include direct quotes from a company executive that weren’t included in
the backgrounder. Then the press release can touch on the same set of
features and benefits in the same order as the white paper. Finally, as
a call to action, it can urge readers to download the entire white paper
for more details.

Slide deck

The feature-by-feature structure of a backgrounder lends itself readily
to being repurposed as a slide deck. You can give each feature a similar
number of slides — three or four is usually ample — and handle them in
the same order as in the white paper. Then work in another two or three
slides at the start for the introducion and the same number at the end
for the conclusions. Reserve the final slide for the call to action,
which can be to download the entire white paper for more details or to
take another step in the sales funnel. Sticking to these simple slides
gives you a manageable slide deck that covers the highlights with no
filler.

After you complete your slide deck, you can decide whether you want to
post it on the web on a slide-sharing site, such as SlideShare
(www.slideshare.net), SlideBoom (www.slideboom.com), or myBrainshark
(www.mybrainshark.com). You can even plan to share your slide deck a few
months after the initial product launch, after the initial buzz has
dissipated and you're not giving away anything to competitors.

[tip.eps] Don’t make the mistake of too many presenters — starting the
show with six or eight slides “to give you a little background about our
company.” News flash: Nobody cares! People viewing your slide decks
aren’t interested in your company; they’re interested in their own
problem and wondering whether your product or service can solve it for
them. Drop all those slides and give everyone who looks at that slide
deck some welcome relief.

Demo

If your offering is software or some sort of system, tool, or hardware
that can be shown in action, consider repurposing your backgrounder as a
product demo. For software, you can do screen captures of using all the
main features described in the backgrounder. For any physical product,
you can take videos of some colleagues or actual customers using each
feature. Perhaps you can find some stock video or B-roll images that
complement your slide deck nicely. You can still assemble your product
demo as a presentation, perhaps building on your existing slide deck.
You’ll likely want the finished results to be packaged as a larger slide
deck with rich media included and perhaps set up as a demo, download
from your website, or a self-running demo to use in your booth at a
trade show or industry event.

Webinar

A webinar naturally builds on the content of a slide deck and a demo. If
you already have both, you don’t need much more than a title slide and
the infrastructure to start taking sign-ups for an online webinar. You
can structure your webinar to move through each feature and benefit with
your slides and then, from time to time, move to the demo to show this
feature in action in the real world. This kind of pacing also keeps your
webinar audience interested and awake, not drifting off to check their
e-mail.

[tip.eps] You want to record your webinar and make the recording
available on-demand through your website. You can also consider posting
the entire webinar, or some choice bits of it, on your company’s YouTube
channel.

OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 7

The Numbered List: As Fresh As Strawberry

In This Chapter

[arrow] Getting to know the liveliest flavor of white papers

[arrow] Figuring out when to use a numbered list

[arrow] Defining the strengths and weaknesses of a numbered list

[arrow] Planning the typical contents of a numbered list

[arrow] Using graphics and rich media in a numbered list

[arrow] Repurposing a numbered list into other formats

Nothing says “summertime” and “the living is easy” better than a big
serving of strawberry ice cream. After all, this flavor is based on a
fruit that was traditionally in season for just six weeks in the summer.
So when the strawberries came in, everyone enjoyed them in shortcake,
summer pudding, with cream, or just plucked straight from the plants.

A white paper structured around a numbered list is like a dish of
scrumptious strawberry ice cream: a light and lively treat that tingles
on your tongue for an instant and then melts away into nothingness. Just
like the fruit, a numbered list is extremely popular, easy to digest,
and so versatile that you can use it for many purposes.

In this chapter, I define this ever-popular flavor of white paper. This
chapter explains what a numbered list is all about, shows how to
recognize it, and reveals when to use it for best results. Then I sketch
the pros and cons of this flavor and show a sample list of contents and
recommended page counts. This chapter also covers how to repurpose a
numbered list into other types of content, especially a blog post, guest
blog, e-newsletter article, or article in a third-party website or trade
journal.

Introducing the Lightest and Liveliest of All White Papers

If you wonder where the numbered list comes from, just check out any
magazine rack. Notice all the tag lines on different covers with one
thing in common: a number. In women’s magazines, these tag lines may be
“35 Spring Looks Under $35” or “5 Ways to Tell He Loves You” or “7 New
Exercises That Burn Fat Like Crazy.” In men’s magazines, they may look
like “6 Ways to Reorganize That Messy Garage, Fast!” or “Our Top 5 Picks
for the All-Stars” or “12 Minutes a Day to Your Best Abs Ever.”

Although the content is quite different, each article is organized the
same way: as a numbered list. These articles sound easy and fun to read,
something you can zip through fast to pick up useful pointers. And this
popular format has moved to the web and into B2B marketing in full
force. Any white paper structured as a numbered list instantly conveys
the impression of a light and lively read.

And it’s the only flavor you can mash up with either of the others to
make a tasty treat (more on mash-ups in Chapter 9). Anyone scanning
through a numbered list is looking for a fresh perspective or some quick
tips to help them solve a problem or do their job better. Readers may
not spend long with this type of white paper, but if it’s well done,
they’ll remember it.

In the following sections, I show you the details of a numbered list,
how to spot one, and why it’s such a popular flavor.

Defining a numbered list

A numbered list is a white paper organized around a set of tips,
questions, answers, or points about some issue. This flavor provides a
quick roundup of highlights that appeal to anyone interested in the
issue, along with the welcome promise of an easy read. The topic can be
anything under the sun: the dominant B2B product in its class, a whole
product category, some hidden flaws in that category, or why you don’t
need it in the first place because it’s about to be replaced by the new,
new thing.

Everyone loves numbered lists. They appeal to a time-pressured,
information-overloaded audience because they signal an easy read that
delivers the bottom line without a lot of extra preamble. A numbered
list works in the following ways:

[check.png] To attract attention with some provocative views

[check.png] To nurture a prospect through the long middle of the sales
funnel

[check.png] To cast doubts on competitors

A white paper in the numbered list flavor is the fastest and easiest to
create, the easiest to repurpose as a blog post or web article, and the
simplest to place in a magazine or website (to see other ways you can
use a numbered list, check out the “Repurposing a Numbered List”
section, later in this chapter). When time is short and you absolutely
must create a white paper to meet your editorial calendar or any other
marketing commitment, consider using this flavor.

Spotting a numbered list

Identifying a white paper structured as a numbered list couldn’t be
easier. Look for a title like “4 Best Practices . . .” or “5 Questions
to Ask . . .” or “6 Things You Must Know . . .” Scan through the pages
and check for content broken into chunks, with each chunk set off with a
number in consecutive order. Bingo! These are the sure signs of a
numbered list flavor.

You won’t likely find a lot of deep research or any high-level overview
in a numbered list. A numbered list is more like a set of spoons prepped
for a food-fight battle that you can fling at any level of any issue.
The content isn’t likely to strain your brain or even stretch it much.
Like strawberry ice cream, a numbered list is intended to be light and
refreshing, not heavy and complex.

Five reasons numbered lists are popular

Everyone from the most old-school marketer to the youngest reader loves
white papers in the numbered list format. Here’s why:

 1. They’re quick and easy to scan.

You can check a heading, decide whether you want to read that point,
and, if not, skip ahead to the next. Even if you don’t read a numbered
list carefully, you can still gather all the key points quickly. Anyone
with too much to read appreciates this format.

2. You always know where you are.

The numbering system itself is like a gauge that measures your progress,
so you can always see how far you’ve come and how much farther you have
to go.

3. They give you a break from heavier material.

In an age of information overload, when most people have too much to
read, too much to remember, and too much to think about, a numbered list
is fast and simple to understand.

4. The structure is clear.

You don’t have to waste any effort figuring out the message because the
key points are already broken out of the text. All the main points are
lying right on the surface, where they’re totally accessible.

5. You’ve been trained for years to appreciate them.

Countless magazines, blogs, and e-newsletters all use this format, not
to mention David Letterman’s Top Ten List every night for more than 25
years. Everyone’s used to seeing numbered lists by now.

Deciding When to Use a Numbered List

A numbered list really shines when you need some quick content to
promote in a blog, e-newsletter, or magazine — or to meet some
commitment in your marketing calendar. Numbered lists, in fact, are the
quickest and easiest flavor of white paper to create. They can present
an almost random set of points held together by the numbering system
alone, without demanding any deep logical explanation that connects all
the dots. When time is short but you really need some content, consider
a numbered list.

In particular, a numbered list is likely the best flavor to pick in
three specific situations:

[check.png] To get attention with provocative views

[check.png] To nurture prospects already in the funnel

[check.png] To cast FUD — fear, uncertainty, and doubt — on competitors

Getting attention with provocative views

One fun way to use a numbered list is to come up with a new, slightly
racy, or provocative twist on some issue. As your list is picked up,
retweeted, and commented on, it can attract a lot of attention that your
company never had before. You can even use a sarcastic or comedic
approach that pokes fun at some sacred cow or unchallenged belief in
your market space. Here are a few examples of possible provocative white
papers done in this flavor:

[check.png] “5 Issues to Remember about Team Building”

[check.png] “6 Gotchas in Disaster Recovery”

[check.png] “7 Things Hackers Know about Your Network That You Don’t”

[check.png] “8 Secret Ratios Wall Street Uses to Stonewall Your Company”

[warning_bomb.eps] Don’t be provocative just for the sake of being
provocative. Each of your items should make a real point that can help
your target reader understand an issue, solve a problem, or make a
decision. Of course, the ultimate decision you want them to make is to
buy from your firm, but you can help them by publishing useful
information, not just sensational, silly fluff.

Nurturing prospects already in the funnel

The middle of the sales funnel can be a lonely place. The selection
committee has to draw up a list of requirements and beat the bushes for
any possible vendors who can likely meet their needs. Often each vendor
needs to send in a multipage answer to an RFP. Then each vendor must be
vetted and their offering evaluated. For a major B2B purchase, this
process can take months, and for a truly major purchase, even years.

A light and lively numbered list can be just the thing to send to
prospects stuck in the waiting game at the middle of the funnel. Doing
so enables your firm to “ping” prospects again to help them remember
you. And it gives you another chance to position your firm as a company
that B2B buyers can trust and even enjoy working with. At this point, a
numbered list may get noticed when a heavier white paper may not. After
all, who doesn’t have time to look at a numbered list?

Casting FUD on competitors

Tearing something down is easier than building it. I should know; I’ve
torn down rotting cottages that came apart like cardboard. You can apply
this maxim to a numbered list designed to undermine your competitors:
All you have to do is tear down someone else’s offering, not build a
better offering yourself. This approach touches on the classic marketing
tactic of tainting your competitors with FUD — fear, uncertainty, and
doubt.

Virtually, every big corporation at some point resorts to FUD. To use
FUD, you suggest that dark, stormy consequences will befall anyone who
buys from the competition, but only blue skies await for people who buy
from you. This tactic is most useful when you and a competitor are
locked in a battle for market share and repeatedly find yourselves on
the same shortlist of B2B vendors. A numbered list can do a lot to knock
the other guy off the list, or at least help you shoulder your way ahead
of him. Here, I touch on each of these elements in a little more detail.

[check.png] Fear of failure and embarrassment: B2B buyers are in it for
their companies, sure, but they’re also in it for themselves: their own
careers, bonuses, raises, and achievements. Buying the wrong thing can
be a major career-limiting move. No one wants to be known as “that goof
who caused all those problems by picking the wrong system.” If a
numbered list can succeed at raising concerns about the other solutions
that B2B buyers are considering, those buyers will take note.

[check.png] Uncertainty about hidden flaws: Every vendor wants to
reassure B2B buyers that it’s a solid outfit they can count on. If a
numbered list lobs a few giant boulders that manage to crack the
carefully constructed foundations of a competitor, it’s doing its job.
One effective way to do this is to uncover any operating limits or
unintended consequences of other solutions, stating that your white
paper is out to reveal the “truth” about these flaws. A numbered list
can actually cast itself in the role of a buyer-protection service, out
to save B2B buyers from making a big mistake.

[check.png] Doubt about claims and features: An effective numbered list
can keep up a steady barrage of sniping questions about the claims and
features of other vendors: “What about this? What about that? What about
the other?” Again, simply casting doubt around these issues is enough.
With these questions, a numbered list can shift the reader’s attention
toward any perceived weaknesses in the competing solutions — and away
from any perceived weaknesses in your own. Done skillfully, this
approach can tilt the entire playing field to your own advantage.

[remember.eps] I never advocate that someone lie, fabricate evidence, or
even stretch the truth beyond recognition in any white paper. Each
flavor of white paper must use facts and logic to make its point. If FUD
is distasteful to you, don’t use it. But be aware that your competitors
may not feel the same way, and they may hit you with a numbered list
carrying a huge payload of FUD.

Looking at the Pros and Cons of Numbered Lists

Critiquing a bowl of strawberry ice cream seems a little pointless. It’s
there; it’s yummy, so why not dive in? But just like every ice-cream
flavor, numbered lists have certain strengths and drawbacks. On the plus
side, numbered lists are the easiest of all to write, the fastest to
read, and the simplest to repurpose. On the downside, a numbered list
can be dismissed for being superficial. And some companies,
publications, and writers go overboard, using this format for almost
everything they produce. In fact, you can have too much of a good thing,
even strawberry ice cream. In the following sections, I reveal the pros
and cons of this flavor to help you decide when to use a numbered list,
when to mash it up with another flavor, and when you can accomplish your
purposes best with a different flavor.

Pro: Easiest to write

A white paper formatted as a numbered list doesn’t actually write
itself, but it can almost feel that way. After you get your list of
points worked out, writing a numbered list can be as easy as filling in
the blanks. What’s more, you can handle each point as a stand-alone
chunk of text. That makes writing, say, a five-point white paper feel
more like writing five short articles rather than one long document.
With the numbered list as a framework, you don’t have to make any
logical links or graceful transitions. You don’t have to construct a
continuous argument. And you can use whatever process or workflow feels
right to you. Perhaps you feel like banging off the easier points first
and then nibbling away at the more difficult ones over the next few
days; well, you can. Because you don’t need to develop a high degree of
continuity, you can write the parts of a numbered list in any order and
assemble them later.

Pro: Fastest to read

A numbered list is the fastest flavor of all to read, for several
reasons. Numbered lists are most often the shortest white papers. The
entire structure is clearly evident in the list of points, questions, or
tips. And a white paper in this modular format is remarkably easy to
scan. Most readers scan through the list of points, stopping at the ones
that interest them and skipping the rest. You have little overhead in
terms of front or back matter and fewer sources or footnotes than in a
problem/solution, all of which makes for a zippy reading experience.

This flavor works especially well for reading on-screen. Web visitors
tend to skim, scan, and skip their way through text. A numbered list is
ideal for that type of quick read. After readers get one point, they can
quickly skip on to the next, which is already broken out with a subhead.
They never have to search for the next link in the argument. Reading a
numbered list, on paper or on-screen, is as easy as one-two-three.

Pro: Easiest to repurpose

Because numbered lists are so popular with readers and so
straightforward in their content, they’re the easiest of all white
papers to repurpose into another format or to place on a third-party
website or magazine. Editors and bloggers understand the appeal of
numbered lists. They know readers love them because they’re so
accessible. Because numbered lists are usually quite concise, editors
know they won’t take a lot of work to edit and republish. In many cases,
when you suggest an article in this format, editors and bloggers jump at
it. For more on how to repurpose this flavor and how to approach
editors, see the section “Repurposing a Numbered List,” later in this
chapter.

Con: Most superficial

One downside of a pure numbered list is that it’s the most superficial
of any flavor. With a breezy, scatterbrained approach, a numbered list
can’t provide the deep detail of a backgrounder. And with a shorter
length and shallower focus, a numbered list simply can’t offer the same
in-depth understanding as a problem/solution flavor. The numbered list
is very much a sweet and sugary treat. It may be tasty, but it’s not
what you’d serve to anyone expecting a hearty helping of knowledge to
muse on for the next few days.

[tip.eps] The obvious way to give a numbered list more gravitas is to
combine it with another flavor. Ideally, this type of mash-up gains the
best of both flavors: either the product detail of a backgrounder plus
the easy-to-scan structure of a numbered list, or the deep insights of a
problem/solution plus the lively approach of a numbered list. Strawberry
goes with either vanilla or chocolate to create a tasty treat. Head to
Chapter 9 for more on combining different flavors of white papers.

Con: Easiest to dismiss

A numbered list can be full of sound and fury without signifying much,
so it’s the easiest flavor to dismiss out of hand. The short length and
shallow focus of a numbered list — the very things that make it so
appealing — can also work against its credibility. Although every flavor
needs a certain grounding in fact, a numbered list doesn’t have to be as
well researched as either other flavor. Many numbered lists, especially
those published on blogs, are based on only a dollop of concrete
information, with all the rest filled in with witty opinions, innuendo,
rumormongering, and other rhetorical devices. Unfortunately, all this
empty rhetoric can backfire when readers sense it, and they can dismiss
the entire document for making too many claims or criticisms backed up
by too few facts.

Con: Can be overused

Sometimes copywriters and marketing people complain that too many
numbered lists are being cranked out. Sometimes a naysayer even compiles
a list like “5 Reasons to Stop Writing Numbered Lists.” This feeling has
a certain validity; at times, the whole world seems to be drowning in
this flavor.

Here’s what Canadian novelist Farzana Doctor had to say about this
format in a recent posting on the Open Book blog:

“Numbered lists make for lazy writing, but people love them. Some of my
most popular posts were numbered lists. For example, ‘10 Things I Wish
I’d Known 10 Years Ago: Letter to My 30-Year-Old Self’ got over 1,050
hits. If I could find a way to write a novel as a numbered list, I’d do
it.”

I think her words sum up the issue nicely: At times, I don’t want to see
everything reduced to a numbered list — but because this format is so
popular, people will likely keep on using it ad infinitum.

On the other hand, the opposite view is just as valid. As long as
everyone, from established publishers to informal bloggers, continues to
dish out this flavor and readers continue to lap it up, what’s the harm?
Would you criticize friends who prefer strawberry ice cream over any
other flavor? Or would you make some allowance for their taste?

Planning a Numbered List

Publishing any white paper involves three major phases: planning,
producing, and promoting. Parts III and IV of this book go into each of
these phases in great detail, breaking them down into a step-by-step
plan. In this section, I cover how planning a numbered list is a little
different from any other flavor, including the following:

[check.png] Gathering the essential information you need

[check.png] Allocating pages

[check.png] Choosing an appropriate title

[check.png] Setting the right tone

Gathering essential information

As with any white paper, you need certain information before you can
start creating a numbered list. Your project will go much more smoothly
if you clarify these five items during your planning:

[check.png] Your intended reader(s)

[check.png] The purpose of the numbered list

[check.png] The topic or issue

[check.png] The high-level numbered points about the topic

[check.png] The call to action at the end

Make sure to research all these items before you jump in to write your
list. Writing comes during Phase 2 (Chapter 13), when you actually
produce your white paper. Otherwise, you’ll be like the writers in David
Letterman’s back room, chugging coffee and chain-smoking as they
frantically try to come up with the last couple of items to round out
the night’s Top Ten List. Now I ask you: Is that any way to write a
white paper?

Your intended reader(s)

The ideal reader for a numbered list can be anyone interested in the
topic it covers. But you’ll likely want to narrow down your intended
audience. You can use the following four categories to help specify your
target readers:

[check.png] Company: Get a sense of the size, vertical market or sector,
and location of the company where your intended reader works. For
example, your reader may work in a medium-sized company anywhere in the
world with too much paper clogging up its processes.

[check.png] Demographics: Find some hard facts, such as the age, sex,
education, and job title(s), of your target readers. For example, your
readers could be department managers in their 30s, split 50-50
male-female, who rely on their in-house IT departments to maintain their
computers. To find these kinds of facts, ask your sales, customer
service, or technical support teams, or anyone else who has daily
contact with your actual customers.

[check.png] Psychographics: Sketch in some of your target audience’s
attitudes, such as their experience, interest in your offering, and
workaday stress. For example, your readers could be aware that their
teams are drowning in paper but skeptical that computers can really
solve this problem. You may have to rely on some broad guesstimates
here. That’s okay, because grappling with these questions is much better
than ignoring them.

[check.png] Technographics: Will your target readers likely access the
numbered list through a desktop, laptop, tablet, or mobile device? If
you expect your numbered list to go viral and be picked up, commented
on, and retweeted a lot, many of your target readers will likely see it
online. A bare-bones numbered list displays fine on a mobile device, so
that’s not a problem. That’s a hint, though, to keep it short and not
bother with a lot of graphics that will make your message harder to see.

If you have any secondary audiences — desirable but not essential
readers — define them as well. For example, your secondary readers may
be associates in their 20s and 30s working on one of those teams
overwhelmed by paper. These readers may not be in a position to buy from
your company, but they may be in an ideal position to recommend a
purchase to help solve their department’s problems.

The purpose of the numbered list

Without a purpose, your white paper could end up being nothing more than
a random collection of numbered points, so make sure to identify what
you want the paper to achieve. Some likely purposes include attracting
attention to your company, nurturing prospects at the middle of the
sales funnel, or casting doubts on competitors (see the earlier section
“Deciding When to Use a Numbered List” for details). You may also want
to train your sales force on how to overcome objections, block sales of
the competition, or help close sales for your company. But a single
numbered list can’t do everything. Pick a top priority and stick to it.

The topic or issue

Be sure to choose a hot-button topic for your intended audience or a
burning issue in their industry. Ideally, your topic is something that
irritates them or keeps them awake at night. In B2B, these topics
typically revolve around money, employees, productivity, costs, waste,
risk, change, or the future. You may want to suggest that your numbered
list shows readers the inside track, clarifies a fuzzy area, or gives
them the bottom line on a key issue. By following the concerns of
bloggers, forums, news reports, and trade journals, you can keep your
finger on the pulse of your market space and dream up many relevant
ideas for numbered lists. Then pick the topic that’s likely to create
the most noise, be the most amusing, or cause the most devastation for
your competitors.

[tip.eps] When you choose your topic, you don’t have to know in advance
what to say about it. You only have to know that it’s an issue your
readers will respond to. After that, you can develop your points.

The high-level numbered points

You may have to do some research to help come up with any solid points
about your topic. Or your whole list may come dancing out of your mind
as if by magic. Most likely, what happens will be something in between:
The first few points come bubbling out, and then you have to work harder
to pull out the final few.

One useful brainstorming method is to list all the points you could
possibly include, no matter how crazy. Then use your existing points as
springboards to further ideas, asking yourself, “Could I push that
further? What about the opposite of that? Is that one idea or two?”
Sometimes you can break up a big, nebulous item into two smaller, more
focused points.

If you’re tackling preconceived notions about your topic, you can negate
those notions either by arguing directly against them or by labeling
them as myths that need reexamining. For example, suppose your company
is fighting the perception that “all scanners are pretty much the same.”
To argue against that, you can call your numbered list something like “6
Things You Should Know about Fifth-Generation Scanners” and then
introduce the point that “not all scanners are the same.” To explode
that perception, you can frame your whole list as “5 Common Myths about
Scanners,” list “all scanners are the same” as a myth, and then show why
it doesn’t hold water.

Coming up with good points will take some thinking and perhaps some
discussion with your team members. Stop when you reach 15 or 20 points,
which is more than enough for one numbered list. Then pare down your
list and keep only the best until you have seven or eight very strong
points.

The call to action at the end

A numbered list doesn’t always contain an explicit call to action,
especially if it’s shorter. But you must have a clear answer to this
question in mind: What do you want your ideal reader to do after reading
your white paper?

If you decide to include a call to action, you can wrap it up in one
sentence, according to my formula:

To find out more about how you can gain [key benefit] with [product or
company name], [do something].

Or for a numbered list that warns about the dangers or hidden flaws of
some competing solutions, you can express the call to action as a
negative:

To find out more about how you can avoid [key pain point], [do
something].

[warning_bomb.eps] If your call to action points readers to your
website, don’t simply send them to your home page on a wild-goose chase.
Instead, send them to a specific landing page that you created just for
readers who finish this white paper. Point them to a short presentation
or demo. Invite them to take a survey or use an interactive calculator.
Have them call a toll-free number or request a free trial. In general,
the more specific the call to action, the more effective and the easier
it is to measure the results.

Allocating pages

As shown in Figure 7-1, a numbered list typically runs five to seven
pages plus an optional cover. Above all, you want to keep this flavor
short and sweet; otherwise, you’re working against the inherent strength
of the list format. Many of the elements listed in this section are
optional to help you keep your numbered lists as short as possible.

[9781118496923-fg0701.eps]

Illustration by Wiley, Composition Services Graphics

Figure 7-1: The typical page count for a numbered list is 5+ pages plus
an optional cover.

[remember.eps] A pure numbered list is generally the shortest of any
white paper. That’s not a bad thing; people love to skim and skip their
way through a brief numbered list, picking up quick tips or perspective
on the way. When in doubt, leave it out of this flavor.

[tip.eps] Pagination is important in any white paper but perhaps most of
all in a numbered list. In a longer document of this flavor, where each
point fills two-thirds or three-quarters of a page, consider asking your
designer to break out a separate page for each numbered point instead of
pouring the text in a continuous stream onto the pages, running right
over page breaks. Doing so can make a big difference in a longer
numbered list.

A numbered list, like all white papers, includes three parts: front
matter, main body, and back matter. The following lists discuss briefly
what to include in each part of a numbered list and how many pages each
should run. For more tips and discussion on using these elements to cook
up a white paper, see Chapter 10. You can also check out some sample
numbered lists at www.thatwhitepaperguy.com/sample-white-papers.html.

[tip.eps] To keep a numbered list brief, much of the front and back
matter can be condensed, merged, or dropped altogether. You can dispense
with a cover, table of contents, and info about the company and keep the
introduction and conclusions short, just two or three sentences each.
Slimming these items down can save four pages or so and give you a
“skinny-mini” version of your numbered list.

Front matter: Zero to one page

Although not all numbered lists include front matter, you may choose to
include the following elements:

[check.png] A cover page is optional in a numbered list, especially if
you want to keep your document as slim as possible. If you do use a
cover, the same rules apply as for any other white paper: Keep the title
above the fold (on the top half of the page), use a big photo that shows
your target audience or target market, keep your logo small, and don’t
clutter it up with any extra text. Make your cover inviting so your
target readers can’t wait to start scanning through your list.

[check.png] If there’s one page you can easily leave out, it’s the
contents and copyright page. A pure numbered list doesn’t gain much from
a table of contents. After all, the contents are self-evident — the
numbered points or questions, perhaps with an introduction at the front,
and some conclusions at the end. And you can easily insert the copyright
bug — © 2013 by Your Company Name — in the footer for every page. If you
don’t want to go that far, you can handily combine the cover with the
contents and copyright page to yield just one page of front matter.
Legal teams from most vendors want to insert a disclaimer along with the
copyright notice. Work with them to keep it short and sweet.

Main body: Four to ten pages

The main body includes the fun and interesting parts of the numbered
list white paper — the introduction and list of points!

[check.png] Most numbered lists include a brief introduction, just to
set the scene, but it can be short. The introduction can simply touch on
the intended reader and the urgency of the issue being covered. In the
introduction for a longer paper, you can include all the numbered points
as bullets to “tell them what you’re going to tell them.” In a shorter
paper, a couple of sentences may be enough, with no need to preview the
list of points before the reader gets into it.

[check.png] Offer between three and nine numbered points. Any less than
three isn’t much of a list, and any more than nine can be too long.
Don’t settle on an even ten points; doing so makes you sound like a
David Letterman wannabe. Hey, after churning out a Top Ten List every
night since 1985, Letterman owns the number ten. But everyone knows a
few of Letterman’s items are going to be groaners that are there only to
pad out the list to a full ten items. So cut your weakest point to end
up with a stronger list of nine items.

[tip.eps] If you list more than about a dozen points, you risk tiring
out your readers. If you end up with anywhere close to 20 points,
consider splitting your list into two and issuing two separate
documents. You can perhaps call these something like “9 Questions to Ask
. . .” and “8 More Questions to Ask . . .” Splitting up your points
gives you two chances to engage your target audience plus a simple call
to action in the first paper that directs readers to the second paper.

[check.png] What about the proof in a numbered list: Can you get away
with less research for this flavor? Well, no. The points in any white
paper, including a numbered list, must be based on facts and logic, not
opinions, fluff, or name-calling. As you put together your numbered
list, you still need to research the topic, listen to various points of
view, drill down for solid facts or convincing proof, and put together a
compelling argument.

[remember.eps] One of the key benefits of a numbered list is that it’s
modular rather than linear. After you dream up all your points, you
don’t have to connect Point A to Point B and on to Point C in a coherent
argument. Of course, you still want to use some sort of rhetorical
approach, such as moving from an overview to the details or from the
most familiar to the least familiar. If you can impose any logical order
on your points, do so. You’ll help your readers understand and remember
your key points.

[tip.eps] Don’t be afraid to work with your original list, adding,
deleting, combining, rephrasing, and reordering your points to make your
list as compelling as possible. To deliver on the promise of a numbered
list, make sure every single point is clear, crisp, and easy to scan.

[check.png] Sidebars generally have no place in a numbered list, unless
they’re extremely short, on the order of a definition for a term. Longer
sidebars can dispel the urgency of the numbered list, distract the
reader, and undermine the effectiveness of the entire document. Use
sidebars cautiously in numbered lists.

Back matter: Zero to one page

The following elements of back matter are optional in a numbered list;
if you choose not to include them, the final numbered point can stand
alone as your ending:

[check.png] After the numbered sections, you may want to provide a half
page of conclusions to wrap up your paper. Keep this section short and
sweet. There’s no need to repeat the whole list of points. You can even
keep your conclusions down to a single sentence.

[check.png] At the end of your conclusions, include a brief call to
action, describing what to do next, where to find more information, or
how to move deeper into the sales funnel.

[check.png] In the final section, about the company, you can simply use
the standard boilerplate from your company’s website. If the one on your
website is longer than 100 words, trim it down to a few sentences by
chopping out phrases. Then finish that section by providing your
company’s website address.

Of course, you probably also want to include contact details, like the
company phone number, e-mail address, fax, Twitter feed, and company
LinkedIn or Google+ pages.

Choosing an effective title

The title is more critical for a numbered list than for any other
flavor. After all, the title gives the number of points, the issue being
covered, and a good sense of a white paper’s viewpoint. Numbered lists
can be more provocative to attract attention, more entertaining to keep
prospects engaged, or more critical to attack competitors. However you
slant your document, that intention should show in the title so readers
can tell at a glance what they’re getting.

[tip.eps] In fact, here’s a handy formula for expressing the title for a
numbered list:

[Number from 3 to 9] + [Benefits / Concerns / Gotchas / Issues /
Problems / Questions / Reasons / Things / Tips / Ways] + [You Must / You
Should / to] + [Ask / Avoid / Consider / Know / Remember / Think / Watch
Out for] + [about / in / on / to / When / with] + [specific issue being
covered]

Try it and see all the possible titles you can easily create, like the
following:

[check.png] 3 Gotchas You Must Avoid When Switching ERP Vendors

[check.png] 4 Issues to Consider with Unattended Scanning

[check.png] 5 Problems to Remember about Your WAN Security

[check.png] 6 Questions to Ask Your Multimedia Production Firm

[check.png] 7 Reasons You Must Think About RFID

[check.png] 8 Things You Should Know When Developing with Open Source

[check.png] 9 Tips to Remember When Writing Numbered Lists

[warning_bomb.eps] Cooking up an intriguing title is much easier than
actually researching and writing a solid numbered list. Whatever title
you pick, your content must deliver on the promise it makes. Don’t be
like one vendor who published a white paper titled “79 Tips on E-mail
Marketing” — but when I counted up the tips, I couldn’t find more than a
dozen! Matching the numbers in your title to the items in your main body
is obvious. Beyond that, make sure you cover what the title talks about.
Don’t pull a bait-and-switch where you get readers interested with a
provocative title but then lapse into a sales pitch about your product.

[tip.eps] Don’t be afraid to break your regular style and express the
initial number in your title in numeric form, as in the preceding
examples. Why? Because people can scan numbers in a list faster than
words, so your title gets noticed more, and because computers sort
numbers to the top of a list, so your title shows up earlier. For
example, in a list of search results — everything else being equal — “8
Questions to Ask . . .” will appear much earlier than “Eight Questions
to Ask . . .”

Setting a provocative tone

Of all the flavors, a pure numbered list is where you can get away with
the most provocative tone. After all, you’re not using this flavor to
present the details of your flagship product or the insights from months
of groundbreaking research. You’re using it to get attention, to keep
the attention of existing prospects at the middle of the funnel, or to
throw mud on your competitors. When you publish a lighter numbered list,
your firm stands out from competitors who only dish out the heavy
flavors that work at the top and bottom of the funnel.

For example, here are actual titles of numbered lists:

[check.png] “6 Things to Consider before You Rely on Open Office”
(critical tone from Microsoft)

[check.png] “7 Infectious Diseases of Marketing — and Their Cures”
(tongue-in-cheek tone from B2B marketing consultant Kathryn Roy)

[check.png] “8 Reasons You Should Kiss Excel Goodbye” (provocative tone
from B2B software vendor 3PL Central)

These titles immediately set the expectation that these documents are
lively, sarcastic, or tongue-in-cheek. And that’s fine. No one expects a
numbered list to be the last word on any issue or a definitive guide to
any subject. It’s enough for it to be brief, lively, and thought
provoking and to undercut the offerings from competing vendors. If you
can do that with style, pizazz, and a touch of humor, this flavor will
win over readers.

Going Beyond Text in a Numbered List

Although I generally like to see at least one concept graphic in every
white paper, a numbered list can be the exception. The organizing
principle of the numbered list is so powerful and so accessible that you
may not even need graphics to retain your reader’s attention. In the
future, you can expect to see more rich media, like animation, audio,
and video, in numbered lists, although this flavor may not be where
these first occur. In the following sections, I discuss how to use
graphics and rich media in a numbered list.

Adding graphics

Graphics are normally included in white papers to clarify concepts and
hold the reader’s attention. But not many readers fall asleep in the
middle of a numbered list! The liveliness of a numbered list diminishes
the need for graphics. Of course, you may want to include a flowchart or
process diagram to illustrate one point or another. Tables, charts, and
other text enhancements are appropriate in a longer numbered list.

Because a numbered list is built up from discrete points arranged in a
modular framework, you may never find any one photo that adequately sums
up the whole document. You may prefer to use one or more photos to
illustrate individual numbered points, instead of trying to convey the
overall message of the document as a whole.

[tip.eps] One approach a designer can take with a numbered list is to
format the numbers themselves as graphic elements. Making the numbers
big, bold, and colorful helps break up the text and reduces the need to
search for a photo to match every point of the white paper.

[tip.eps] Because a cover for a numbered list is optional, you may not
even need a cover photo. If you do use one, look for a photo that sets
the stage by showing the target reader, the target market, or some
symptom of the issue being covered. For example, if your numbered list
talks about six ways to relieve paper burden with unattended scanning,
consider a cover showing an office worker buried in paper. As with any
flavor, photos of the real world build more credibility than clip art or
custom graphics.

Using rich media

Using rich media, like animation, audio, or video, in a numbered list is
not yet common, as discussed in Chapter 3. These forms will likely
become more common over the next few years, but it may take some time to
wash over the numbered list flavor. Rich media can make an old-fashioned
print document more compelling, but the numbered list format is already
so engaging that it has less need for any added attractions.

On the other hand, the modular structure of a numbered list lends itself
nicely to being supplemented with rich media. An existing video or a
piece of B-roll may fit perfectly with one point in a numbered list,
without needing any continuity with the other points. You may be able to
use a bit of video in a tongue-in-cheek way, perhaps some retro scene
from a black-and-white training film — as long as you always get proper
permissions for any copyright material. The Internet provides many
sources for free, public domain, Creative Commons, or inexpensive video
snippets that you may want to use.

Repurposing a Numbered List

A white paper in the numbered list flavor is quite easy to repurpose as
an article, blog post, or press release. Because magazines and websites
thrive on numbered lists, they’re the easiest flavor to place with a
third-party publisher. Although some observers caution that numbered
lists have been overused, readers and web surfers seem happy to keep
looking at them. And where there are eyeballs, there is marketing. So
you may as well recycle your numbered lists to the hilt. The following
sections explain how.

Blog post

Repurposing a numbered list for a blog is simple. You can just take the
whole paper, keep the numbered points intact, but cut most of the text
supporting each point. Boil down the introduction (if any) to a couple
of sentences, and then do the same for the conclusions. Many bloggers
say that the ideal length for a blog post is 500 to 600 words, so you
don’t have any room to spare. If you use 50 words for the intro, 50 for
the conclusions, and 100 each for five points, that’s all you get. You
just created a post from a numbered list in minutes flat. Next, post it
on your blog, with a link to the full white paper for those who want an
extended discussion.

[tip.eps] Another way to repurpose a numbered list as a blog post is to
take the first three or four points, keep some text with each one, and
then point to the full white paper to see the rest of the list. But I
don’t recommend doing this. Showing the whole list and letting
interested readers click through for more details is better for three
big reasons:

1. Not playing hide-and-seek with your content shows more respect for
your reader’s time.

2. Showing just the bare list of points may sling as much FUD on your
competitors as the full white paper.

3. A complete list has a better chance than a partial to be picked up,
retweeted, and commented on.

Guest blog

After you create your original blog post, you can easily repost the same
topic with a different intro and ending on any other blog that accepts
guest submissions. You could try the blog from an association, trade
journal, forum, or any interested blogger who follows your space. Send
the blog post and a link to the full white paper on your website. Your
fellow blogger may decide to comment on your numbered list blog, pick up
part or all of it, or ask you to tweak it a little so the search engines
don’t find exactly the same text in two places, which is a no-no for
SEO. Your guest blog may become one of that blog’s most interesting and
controversial posts ever.

[tip.eps] To approach a blog where you want your company to be featured,
simply drop the blogger an e-mail, something like this:

Would you be interested in a guest blog from Acme Scanner called “5
Questions You Must Ask before You Buy Another Scanner”? In 600 words,
this post points out some little-known drawbacks of many scanners on the
market to help business buyers avoid common “gotchas.” This blog post is
a brief summary of our five-page white paper with the same title. I can
provide a link so any of your readers who are interested can click to
see the full white paper.

Believe me, if that blog accepts guest posts, this approach will get
noticed. You may well hear back on it in minutes.

E-newsletter article

If you publish an e-newsletter, you have another golden opportunity to
repurpose your numbered list. Depending on the structure of your
e-newsletter, you can do this in several ways:

[check.png] As a complete article, where you republish your original
numbered list white paper verbatim in the e-newsletter. The only problem
is that the full white paper is probably too long to fit your
e-newsletter format.

[check.png] As an intro to the complete white paper, where you publish
just an intriguing snippet or the first few sentences of the white
paper, with a link to download the entire numbered list PDF.

[check.png] As a skeletal article, where you publish your short,
blog-style posting that gives the entire numbered list with only a
little detail for each point. Then you invite readers interested in more
detail to download the white paper in full. I prefer this format for the
same reasons given in the “Blog post” section: This way, you’re not
making your readers play any guessing games or wasting any of their
time.

Placed article

A placed article is an opinion piece, column, or article published in a
trade magazine, newspaper, or on a website without any notice that it’s
coming from an outside vendor. Most often, a placed article gets a
byline from a marketing executive from the vendor. To a B2B publisher,
the obvious advantage is that this content is free. And because this
piece was professionally written, the editor won’t have to do much to
get it ready. If your numbered list is based on credible facts with some
provocative new twist, it can make compelling content for the people who
read that journal or visit that website. And as the white paper sponsor,
a vendor gets a wider platform for his ideas, so this is an all-around
win-win-win.

As the old saying goes, “If you want an audience, start a fight.” So if
the placed article attacks some sacred cows or directs some zingers at
other vendors in the field, that helps attract attention to the
publication, the content, and the vendor.

If you’ve never done it before, you may be wondering how you place your
numbered list as an article with a trade magazine or website. There’s no
magic here. Just call or e-mail the editor, tell him the title of the
white paper, and say it’s available as a bylined article for no fee.
Many outlets will ask for exclusive rights to your placed article so
that it doesn’t pop up in the pages of a competing publication. That’s
okay as long as you start from the top, with the outlets with the
biggest circulation. Don’t start from the bottom and work your way up or
you may give away the exclusive republishing rights to a much smaller
outlet than necessary.

[tip.eps] You really have only one good shot at placing a numbered list
in a legitimate website or trade journal. After it gets out there on
somebody else’s website, no one else is likely to pick it up.

[warning_bomb.eps] If editors or webmasters ask you to pay a fee to
place your article with them, think twice. I’m old school enough to
consider this request a questionable practice. I can’t believe any
credible outlet with much of an audience can get away with charging
companies to run vendor-sponsored content like a white paper disguised
as regular editorial. Readers aren’t stupid; they’re bound to smell
something fishy when many articles come from some vendor or other.
Unless the price is dirt-cheap and you’re very hungry for exposure, move
on and try the next outlet on your list. And if you’re paying for
exposure, don’t give them an exclusive. You may still be able to place
the same piece somewhere else for free and get double exposure.

OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 8

The Problem/Solution: As Complex As Chocolate

In This Chapter

[arrow] Getting to know the most substantial flavor of white papers

[arrow] Figuring out when to use a problem/solution

[arrow] Defining the strengths and weaknesses of a problem/solution

[arrow] Planning the typical contents of a problem/solution

[arrow] Using graphics and rich media in a problem/solution

[arrow] Repurposing a problem/solution into other formats

Chocolate is second only to vanilla among the world’s most-loved flavors
of ice cream. Many consider it the deepest, richest, longest-lasting,
and most satisfying flavor of ice cream ever created. And just like
chocolate ice cream, the problem/solution white paper has millions of
devotees: marketing people who have tasted its wonders and keep on
coming back for more.

In this chapter, I describe what a problem/solution white paper is all
about, show how to identify one, and reveal when to use it for best
results. Then I sum up the pros and cons of this flavor and provide the
typical sections to include, along with recommended page counts. This
chapter also describes how to repurpose the rich content of a
problem/solution into other formats, especially a blog post, placed
article, slide deck, webinar, or conference presentation.

Introducing the King of Content

The problem/solution white paper is like chunky chocolate ice cream: a
rich and satisfying experience that lingers long after the moment is
gone. A substance in chocolate is said to mimic the feeling of falling
in love, which may be why many find it so addictive. Readers of this
flavor also experience a powerful mood-altering sensation as they gain
deeper insights into some troubling business issue.

An effective problem/solution white paper is a persuasive essay that
uses facts and logic to present a new solution to a serious problem that
afflicts many companies in a given industry. With this soft-sell
approach, a problem/solution white paper provides useful information
that helps intended readers understand an issue, solve a problem, or
make a decision.

This approach makes the problem/solution white paper the most powerful,
most complex, and most challenging of all the flavors. I consider this
flavor the undisputed king of content at the very top of the pyramid: No
other piece of marketing material can consistently generate so many
leads for so long and pay back so much on its investment. No other piece
of marketing collateral can so dramatically change how a prospect views
a vendor, so effectively define an entire market space, or so
significantly elevate the level of respect for a B2B vendor across an
entire industry.

In the following sections, I describe this complex yet tasty flavor of
white paper, show you how to spot one, and explain why B2B executives
find it so appealing.

Defining a problem/solution

Presenting a new solution to an acknowledged business problem in a
convincing way is no small feat. A problem/solution white paper must be
supported throughout by credible facts, convincing proof, and logical
arguments. In many ways, this flavor is similar to the closing argument
of a trial lawyer. The goal is to build an open-and-shut case that all
right-minded people accept as fair and reasonable.

It’s hard to say when this formula first originated. The
problem/solution format was described by AdWords guru Perry Marshall in
2003 and refined by social media expert Michael Stelzner in his 2006
book Writing White Papers (WhitePaperSource Publishing). I’ve been
promoting it as one of the three main flavors of white papers since
before 2010. And the effectiveness of this flavor continues to be
recognized by more and more B2B marketers around the world.

Problem/solution white papers are the toughest of all flavors and take
the longest to create. They must provide truly useful content based on
reliable research, engaging ideas, and compelling conclusions. But just
like any challenge you overcome, problem/solution white papers are the
most rewarding. And the rich content of this flavor makes it the most
versatile to repurpose in many other ways.

Spotting a problem/solution

Identifying a problem/solution white paper can be challenging. It
doesn’t dwell on product information; instead, it tends to focus on a
broad industry problem and a better way to solve it, as implemented in a
certain product or service. That specific solution is only mentioned
late in the document, after discussing the drawbacks of every other
possible approach to solving the problem. In this subtle way, a
problem/solution white paper positions an offering in a market space and
argues for its superiority. But that structure makes this flavor the
hardest of any to spot.

In a pure problem/solution, you won’t find content structured as a set
of numbered points or any number in the title. You also won’t see many
details on the features and benefits of one particular offering with the
product name in the title. A classic problem/solution starts off by
describing a big problem and eventually gets around to introducing a
new, improved solution. If you see those two elements, you’re most
likely looking at some version of a problem/solution flavor.

Understanding why this flavor appeals to executives

By definition, an executive is someone who makes things happen.
Executives can make things happen best when they understand the space
they’re operating in, weigh several possible courses of action, and pick
the most effective option. Always remember that a truly effective
problem/solution white paper helps a businessperson understand an issue,
solve a problem, or make a decision. Notice how those imperatives line
up perfectly with the challenges facing all executives.

If you’re beginning to suspect that the problem/solution flavor was
designed to appeal to executives, you’re probably right. C-level
executives, especially, don’t have any time to plow through a
backgrounder about the inner workings of a specific product or to sort
through lightweight numbered lists looking for solid information. That
makes the problem/solution the preferred flavor for the vast majority of
juicy B2B prospects.

Deciding When to Use a Problem/Solution

The problem/solution flavor is gaining popularity all the time as more
marketing people realize how effective this format can be. Using this
flavor makes sense for any B2B company seeking to build recognition and
attract as many prospects as possible. You can use this flavor to share
the high-level benefits of a new, improved approach with stakeholders,
including your sales force and channel partners. You can use the same
paper to influence any analysts, bloggers, and journalists who cover
your industry. If your company wants to redefine a market space, this
flavor is the only one with enough depth to accomplish that. If you have
the time and the resources to pour into developing a problem/solution,
it can really pay off in a big way.

In particular, a problem/solution is the best of all flavors to pick in
five specific situations:

[check.png] To generate leads at the top of the sales funnel

[check.png] To educate salespeople and channel partners

[check.png] To educate analysts, bloggers, and journalists

[check.png] To redefine a market space

[check.png] To build mindshare

Generating leads at the top of the funnel

Hands down, a problem/solution is the best flavor to generate leads at
the top of the sales funnel. This flavor enables a company to cast the
widest possible net and harvest the biggest catch of fresh leads. (To
understand how this works, see the later section “Pro: Generates the
most leads.”)

Because a problem/solution white paper is best aimed at prospects near
the start of the buying process, this flavor can’t come across as a
sales pitch. Unlike a backgrounder, this flavor uses a soft sell to
inform prospects about an issue and position the sponsor as a trusted
advisor. When the time comes to buy, B2B prospects feel so positive
about your company that they’re inclined to do business with you.

[tip.eps] Any smaller company that struggles to generate leads and
fights to get onto vendor shortlists should consider publishing at least
one white paper in the problem/solution format. By the same token, any
large company addicted to backgrounders should publish a few
problem/solution papers to round out its library and pull some fresh
prospects into the funnel.

Educating salespeople and channel partners

For any company moving into fresh territory, the sales force puts the
boots on the ground. Your salespeople need to understand the point of
your offering, the problems it’s designed to solve, and the drawbacks of
every other way of doing things. A problem/solution white paper can give
your salespeople all the background they need to discuss the problem in
a more informed way. It can also serve as a send-ahead or a
leave-behind, a conversation-opener or a deal-closer. Ideally, a
problem/solution white paper gives you a way to elevate your company so
far above other vendors that your salespeople can sell without hearing
any objections about pricing, features, delivery dates, or anything
else.

All these benefits apply equally to channel partners. If you have a
network of consultants, retailers, or value-added resellers (VARs) that
help generate revenues, send them all your white papers. An effective
problem/solution white paper can make the difference between being
remembered or being forgotten when your channel partners are in front of
a client. Imagine channel partners trying to explain the benefits of a
product with no white papers versus a product with a highly effective
problem/solution flavor they can study and hand out to their own
prospects. Which product do you think they recommend and sell more
often?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Boosting sales with a creative twist

When I was VP of Marketing of a tech startup, I oversaw the creation of
a special-report white paper focused on a fictional manufacturing firm,
Acme Tricycle Works. In the white paper, two executives, in the roles of
the decision maker and the technical recommender, stopped by several
departments to discuss the problems they used to suffer and how much our
new, improved offering had helped their company. We printed this
creative twist on the problem/solution format as a small booklet in full
color. That made it a relatively expensive project for a small company,
about $25,000 all told.

Here’s how our West Coast sales manager put the results: “Whenever I go
into a meeting and put out a copy of our handbook for everyone at the
table, our company shoots right to the top of their vendor list!” That
little publication meant instant credibility for our firm, even though
we were far smaller than most of our competitors. That problem/solution
booklet helped us sell $20 million worth of software over the next two
years. This is the king of content in action.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Educating analysts, bloggers, and journalists

A problem/solution white paper is a powerful item to send to opinion
leaders in your space, including analysts, bloggers, journalists, and
anyone who runs a website that your B2B buyers consider influential. In
this context, you aren’t necessarily expecting those opinion leaders to
pick up your content to republish or even to comment on it publicly. (Of
course, both are valid promotional tactics to try.) But even if they
look at your white paper as “deep background,” it can help shape their
perceptions of your market from then on.

Imagine how opinion leaders see one company that regularly sends them
helpful and well-informed white papers versus another that doesn’t. Who
do you think they’ll mention, quote, and seek out for further opinions?
By feeding the media and other opinion leaders your best thinking in the
form of a problem/solution white paper, you’re taking your best shot at
influencing the influencers. As publicists have long known, getting
editorial coverage has an incredible multiplying factor. If you get a
favorable notice from one blogger with 5,000 subscribers, you’ve just
generated 5,000 hits of positive word of mouth. If you get a notice in a
magazine with 50,000 readers, that’s 50,000 possible new hits. You can’t
buy that kind of publicity.

Redefining a market space

Occasionally, a B2B vendor may seek to redefine an entire market space,
perhaps to enlarge it by showing how it overlaps with nearby spaces,
perhaps to limit it by showing how it has certain unique and specific
requirements. Perhaps you want to introduce a new acronym or do
something else to tilt the entire playing field in your favor. Which
flavor do you suspect would be best for these purposes? You guessed it:
a problem/solution. A numbered list may hint in passing at some of these
ideas without the depth to develop them. A backgrounder is too busy
navel-gazing at your own offering to achieve this kind of profound
effect. But a problem/solution is the only flavor than can grapple with
this challenge of redefining a whole market space.

In this case, the problem is likely that every other vendor looks at the
market space the wrong way, creating difficulties, limiting results, and
wasting money. The new, improved solution can be as basic as a change in
perspective so that readers see the market space in a new light. If your
company ever reaches that historic moment when you need to redefine your
market space, the problem/solution is the best flavor to use.

Building mindshare

An effective problem/solution white paper can do wonders to build more
recognition for your company. Ideally, this flavor is so thoroughly
researched and well expressed that it has ample credibility. Those
qualities can propel your white paper up and down the food chain, passed
from one executive to another within the same company and even between
peers and friends in different companies. You may find your
problem/solution white paper being commented on and recommended via
social media. All this pass-along publicity helps to build mindshare by
reaching B2B executives who may not have heard of your company before.
Better mindshare helps smaller companies work their way into the inner
circle and on to the vendor lists along with the big guys.

Looking at Pros and Cons of Problem/Solutions

Almost everyone loves chocolate ice cream. But despite what some
5-year-olds may tell you, you can’t have it with every meal. And
sometimes chocolate ice cream just won’t work — like at the end of a
huge Italian wedding dinner, when you can’t possibly hold another bite,
except for perhaps some light, melt-on-your tongue lemon gelato.

Just like every other flavor, the problem/solution has its strengths and
its limitations. In some situations, a problem/solution white paper
works better than others. On the plus side, this flavor routinely
generates the most leads, lasts the longest in active duty, and returns
the most on your investment. On the other hand, a problem/solution is
the hardest flavor to create, takes the longest to complete, and, in
rare circumstances, can even heighten an internal conflict that can’t be
resolved. In the following sections, I explore each of these pros and
cons to the problem/solution flavor.

Pro: Generates the most leads

Every business needs new prospects to fill the sales funnel, which is
where a problem/solution really shines; it draws more fresh leads into a
vendor’s funnel than any other flavor. To understand why, think about
how most B2B buyers use search engines like Google to get the answer to
a question or to find help understanding an issue. Do they Google the
name of some product or search for a top-ten list? Or do they Google
their actual problem or question and see what pops up in the search
results that looks interesting? Of course, people search for answers to
their real issues, which is precisely why a problem/solution generates
the most leads.

By grappling with a serious business problem that afflicts an entire
industry — and inserting appropriate keywords that convey how business
people express that problem — this flavor turns up in search results at
the best possible time: when business executives are actively looking
for help. Even if those readers have never heard of your company before,
when they download a white paper that provides useful advice and an
enlightening perspective, they begin to see your company as a trusted
advisor, which is exactly what you want.

Pro: Lasts the longest

As long as the same nagging problem remains unsolved for many companies
and as long as B2B buyers search for help and find your white paper,
your problem/solution can continue to work for you. Done properly, a
document in this flavor can have a long and happy life: at least one
year, often stretching into several. After all, what harm is there in
leaving an effective white paper available on your website for a couple
of years, as long as people are still downloading it? Many times, you
can update or refresh a problem/solution and use it for another year.

You need to update or take down a problem/solution white paper only when
most companies have already solved the problem it describes, when new
categories or alternate solutions exist that you didn’t cover, or when
your own offering has evolved so much that it doesn’t resemble what you
were talking about in your original document. Otherwise, leave it up,
and let it keep on working to generate leads.

Pro: Makes the best investment

This long life, coupled with its supreme lead-generating powers, makes
the problem/solution white paper the best investment of any flavor. Why?
Because marketers calculate the total number of leads generated by a
campaign as follows:

[9781118496923-eq0801.eps]

Time after time, marketers find that leads generated by white papers are
much less costly than leads generated with advertising, direct mail,
trade shows, or other traditional marketing methods. And an effective
problem/solution white paper generates more leads for longer than any
other flavor. Where a backgrounder looks under the hood at a single
product, a problem/solution surveys an entire industry. While a numbered
list is often quickly forgotten for its frivolity, a problem/solution is
taken seriously for years to come. Even though the costs to produce a
problem/solution are slightly higher, the results make it worth every
penny.

Con: Hardest to create

Despite the many strengths of a problem/solution, it’s the most
difficult flavor of white paper to create. This flavor demands that
marketing and sales executives take a break from their regular habits of
pitching and selling. Instead, they must provide clear, compelling
answers to some fundamental questions, like these:

[check.png] What problem does this offering solve?

[check.png] What other solutions have been tried in the past?

[check.png] What drawbacks do other solutions suffer from?

[check.png] How does this offering overcome these drawbacks to solve the
problem best?

Another challenge: A problem/solution white paper must present a
mountain of proof. For B2B buyers, proof points include specific numbers
from impeccable sources, persuasive comments from acknowledged experts,
compelling testimonials from delighted customers, and ironclad logic
that ties it all together with chocolaty goodness.

Some marketing teams find these challenges daunting. They may want to
retreat back to a backgrounder, which is much easier to research simply
by speaking to your own in-house people. But it’s usually better to push
on to complete a problem/solution white paper that can generate many
leads and serve your company for years to come.

Con: Slowest to create

Because of its ambitious scope, a problem/solution white paper takes
longer than any other to create. It takes time to compile detailed
research, to analyze all the traditional solutions, and to include a
buyer’s guide of what to look for in an ideal solution. And it takes
time to write a coherent narrative that links together all this content
in a compelling way, without veering off into a sales pitch. No other
flavor aims this high or takes this much in-depth research or nuanced
writing. I estimate a minimum of four elapsed weeks for creating a
problem/solution: one week each for planning, researching, writing, and
reviewing. And these tasks can often take six to eight weeks, especially
when numerous interviews or reviewers are involved. When you need a
white paper in a big hurry, don’t pick a problem/solution flavor.

Con: May heighten internal conflicts

Believe it or not, some white papers don’t get completed because various
people can’t agree on some fundamental point! The most common split is
engineering versus sales. One side thinks the key point of some offering
is obviously this, while the other declares that anyone in his right
mind knows it’s that. Having to set down in writing the key problem that
the offering is designed to solve and how it does it somehow brings up
such strong differences of opinion that the white paper gets stalled and
even abandoned.

This situation doesn’t happen often, mind you, but I have encountered it
— most often with a problem/solution. Conflicting opinions don’t seem to
happen so much with a backgrounder, which simply describes how an
offering works, or with a numbered list, which can usually flit around
any heavy issues. If you’ve heard any serious internal conflicts about a
product, get them sorted out before the writer starts interviewing
people.

Planning a Problem/Solution

Publishing any flavor of white paper involves three major phases:
planning, producing, and promoting. Parts III and IV of this book go
into each of these phases in great detail, breaking them down into a
step-by-step plan. In this section, I cover how creating a
problem/solution is a little different from any other flavor, including
the following:

[check.png] Gathering the essential information you need

[check.png] Allocating pages

[check.png] Choosing an appropriate title

[check.png] Setting the right tone

Gathering essential information

You can’t make chocolate without getting some cacao beans. By the same
token, you can’t write a problem/solution white paper without gathering
some basic information about the project. You likely need a little
research to dig up these items and establish the frame of reference for
your document, and that’s fine. Every project goes much more smoothly if
you clarify these seven items during your planning process:

[check.png] Your intended reader(s)

[check.png] The purpose of the problem/solution

[check.png] The industry-wide problem

[check.png] The traditional solutions and their drawbacks

[check.png] The new, improved solution

[check.png] What to look for in an ideal solution

[check.png] The call to action at the end

The writing comes during Phase 2 (see Chapter 13), when you actually
produce your white paper. If you’re working with an in-house writer, he
can be involved in every stage of this research. You’re more likely
working with an outside writer, so you have a choice: Do all this
research without the writer and hand it over, or involve the writer in
your research with you.

[tip.eps] I always appreciate when clients think about these issues
before speaking with me, but I still want to walk through all these
matters in a conference call with all their reviewers, just to make sure
everyone is on the same page. This step is a recommended best practice
that helps avoid the dreaded “scrap and rework” that can occur when a
hidden reviewer pops up late in the process and declares, “You’re doing
it all wrong! Go back! Do it my way!”

Your intended reader(s)

To help target your problem/solution to the right audience, identify
your ideal reader as specifically as possible. You can use the following
four categories to help specify your target readers:

[check.png] Company: Get a sense of the size, vertical market or sector,
and location of the company where your intended reader works. For
example, your reader may work at an engineering company in the southeast
that specializes in managing major construction projects, such as
highways and power plants.

[check.png] Demographics: Dig up hard facts, such as the age, sex,
education, and job title(s), of your target readers. For example, your
readers could be managers in their 30s or 40s who are 60-40 male-female,
all with civil engineering degrees. To find these kinds of facts, ask
your sales, customer service, or technical support teams, or anyone else
who has daily contact with your actual customers.

[check.png] Psychographics: Sketch in some of your target audience’s
attitudes, such as their experience, interest in your offering, and
workaday stress. For example, your readers could be aware that their
engineering drawings aren’t always where they should be and that lost
documents cost time and money. They may be open minded about using some
sort of web-based system to solve those problems. Summing up the
attitudes of a whole audience can be difficult, but wrestling with these
questions is much better than ignoring them. The insights you gain can
be important.

[check.png] Technographics: Will your target readers likely access the
problem/solution white paper through a desktop, laptop, tablet, or
mobile device? Perhaps the vast majority of your target readers will
hear about your white paper by doing a Google search and then viewing it
on a laptop or tablet while they travel between sites (as a passenger,
of course, not the driver). That’s useful information to know.

[tip.eps] Remind your white paper designer of these technographics
during the design phase. Knowing that readers will likely view your
white paper on-screen may well affect how the designer formats the
pages, how many columns and graphics he uses, and so on.

If you have any secondary audiences — desirable but not essential
readers — define them as well. For example, your secondary readers may
be female clerks in their 20s and 30s who are responsible for using
outdated systems to manage engineering libraries. You may consider these
readers secondary because they’re not in a position to buy from your
company, but they may be in an ideal position to recommend a purchase to
help solve their problems.

The purpose of the problem/solution

What are you trying to accomplish with this flavor? Some likely purposes
include generating leads; educating salespeople, channel partners,
analysts, bloggers, or journalists; redefining a market space; or
building mindshare. A problem/solution white paper can do a lot, but it
can’t do everything. Pick your main goal and stick to it.

The industry-wide problem

Before you can write a problem/solution, you must pinpoint the precise
problem you intend to address, which should be an acknowledged issue
that causes daily pain for many companies within a certain industry.
Don’t pick an insidious problem that may be wasting resources but
remains out of sight and out of mind — like a leaky water pipe
underground. Pick a problem that’s aboveground and noticeable, more like
those unsightly piles of paper files cluttering up the entire company’s
headquarters. And make sure it’s a problem you have an offering to
solve: a product, service, technology, methodology, or vision.

If you’re wondering what makes a good topic for this flavor of white
paper, here are just a few of the many problems I’ve written about in
the past year:

[check.png] Engineering firms have trouble managing all the plans,
drawings, and documents that pile up for major construction projects.

[check.png] Most companies spend too much on mobile phone services for
employees.

[check.png] Drug development teams get stuck for years trying to
generate acceptable test results for FDA approvals.

[check.png] Many private-school administrators don’t understand the
electronic data security standards that apply when they begin to accept
credit cards.

[check.png] Business process software can’t help most organizations run
more efficiently, because it wasn’t designed for their type of
operations.

Notice how this flavor can address a vast range of organizations,
sectors, and business challenges.

The traditional solutions and their drawbacks

Draw up a list of all the possible ways to solve this problem. Don’t
forget to include what many people do, even in business: Ignore it and
hope it goes away. In your final white paper, you can spell out the huge
cost of ignoring the problem as it festers and grows. Work through the
following steps to create your list:

 1. Include using manual methods, forms, spreadsheets, or any other type
of homegrown or do-it-yourself system.

2. Add all the current solutions on the market.

Simply listing all the competing companies and products at this point is
okay. Ultimately, you’ll need to create a set of buckets to sort these
solutions into various categories, classes, genres, or types.

3. Think of the failings, limitations, or unintended consequences of
each category of existing solution.

Here, you get to set up every possible alternative to your offering and
give each one your best shot. You don’t have to know all these details
right off the bat, but the more you can list at this point, the faster
your writer can get on with his research.

The new, improved solution

You already know all about your offering and how superior it is. But
now, you need to shift out of your regular thought patterns and consider
your offering in more generic terms. What category, class, genre, or
type of solution is it, exactly? Where does it fit in your market space:
Is it a dominant product or a new challenger? Did your company create a
whole new category? Or did you redesign and rethink an existing category
with some breakthrough innovations? Can you accurately label it the
“next generation” or “version 2.0” of an existing paradigm? Why does it
work better than anything else on the market? What proof do you have for
that claim?

When you start thinking this way, you get ready to face the toughest
challengeof your problem/solution white paper: providing some truly
educational information for your readers, positioning your offering
accurately in its market space, and showing how it works better than
anything else ever designed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

What if your offering really isn’t better?

What if your solution really isn’t any better than anything else on the
market? What if it’s only cheaper, easier to use, saves energy, or is
made from 95 percent biodegradable items sourced from fair-trade
farmers? Well, each of these benefits — or any other unique selling
point — can be enough to drive a problem/solution white paper.

For example, consider pricing: Many companies admit that they’re
drowning in paper. Some have even calculated how much they spend to
handle every paper invoice, check, form, and other items on paper
instead of electronically. Say the best way to solve this problem, in
many cases, is to route e-mail attachments directly to a
fifth-generation scanner that can run unattended and convert those
attachments into structured data, all set to import flawlessly into a
spreadsheet, database, CRM, ERP, or Big Data analytics system. Who
wouldn’t want that? The only problem is, this service is extremely
expensive.

Say Acme Scanners has just released a cost-reduced scanner that can do
almost everything that one of the high-end models does, but it costs
only one-tenth as much. This offering can work well for a
problem/solution white paper. In this case, the problem can remain the
devastating costs of paper burden. But then you can move on to the
related problem that the ultimate solution has already been invented,
but it’s been priced far beyond the reach of many organizations. What’s
needed is a scanner that can do everything the high-end machines do,
only at a much lower price point. There you have it. Acme Scanners to
the rescue, with a scanner priced for everyone.

Similarly, the problem could be that unattended scanning is too
difficult to set up, that it sucks up too much energy and air
conditioning, or that the existing models all use certain rare earth
chemicals sourced from nasty warlords in downtrodden countries that are
impossible to recycle. As long as your offering has at least one unique
selling point that makes it better than the competition in any way, you
can still write a problem/solution white paper around it.

What about the worst-case scenario, when your offering doesn’t have a
single competitive advantage but is only a “me-too” copy of someone
else’s product? If your offering isn’t better, cheaper, faster, more
rugged, more energy efficient, more powerful, or more something, more
anything, then using a problem/solution flavor of white paper may not be
realistic. In this case, you can still use a white paper; just think
about doing a backgrounder or a numbered list instead.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

What to look for in an ideal supplier

Still thinking about your offering and your company in generic terms,
list all your key competitive advantages, unique selling points, or all
the things that only you can rightfully claim. This list will eventually
turn into a page of bullet points. Compile what you can of these points
for now, remembering that you’ll have to fill it in later.

[tip.eps] Every company in the world can make nebulous claims like, “We
believe in excellent customer service.” But that’s not good enough for a
white paper. Have you won the top industry award for best customer
service for the past five years in a row? Now that’s proof! In this
case, you can write your bullet point for this item like one of these
options:

[check.png] “Award-winning track record for top customer service”

[check.png] “Recognized for industry-leading customer service”

[check.png] “Industry’s top customer service for five years running”

That makes it a lot harder for any competitor to say, “Me too! Me Too!
We do that, too!” If anyone wants to challenge this claim, the most
obvious questions are, “Awards from whom? Recognized how? Who says
you’re the top?”

The call to action at the end

What do you want your ideal reader to do after reading your white paper?
Don’t refer busy people to your home page to wander around looking for
the right place to click. Instead, send them to a specific landing page.
Point them to a short presentation or demo. Invite them to use an
interactive calculator. Have them call a toll-free number or request a
free trial. Ideally, you can build the call to action into your sales
cycle as a natural next step. In general, the more specific the call to
action, the more effective and easier it is to measure the results.

Allocating pages

As shown in Figure 8-1, a problem/solution white paper is typically nine
pages or more from start to finish. About half of the document is the
actual content; the other half is the wrapper around the content. To
stay in today’s sweet spot, a problem/solution can run a little shorter
or a little longer, but not by much. Even more than the page count, pay
attention to the content. A white paper in this flavor must provide
reliable research, engaging ideas, and compelling conclusions. If you
can give your readers all of that, they won’t care much about the
length.

[9781118496923-fg0801.eps]

Illustration by Wiley, Composition Services Graphics

Figure 8-1: The typical page count for a problem/solution white paper is
9+ pages.

Like all white papers, a problem/solution includes three parts: front
matter, main body, and back matter. The following sections discuss
briefly what to include in each part of a problem/solution flavor and
how many pages it should run. Remember that these page estimates are
only guidelines. You can expand most of these sections or condense some
of the front and back matter into fewer pages. For more tips and
discussion on building a white paper, see Chapter 10. You can also check
out some sample problem/solution white papers at
www.thatwhitepaperguy.com/sample-white-papers.html.

Front matter: Two to three pages

The front matter for a problem/solution is more significant than for any
other flavor and usually includes all the elements in this section.

A cover page sets up the serious matters under discussion. For best
visibility, keep the title to the top half of the page. Show your logo
but keep it small; acknowledging that your white paper is sponsored
content from a vendor is fine, but you don’t want prospective readers to
think they’re about to get clobbered with a sales pitch. If you prefer
not to use a visual cover, you can combine a text cover with the
contents to eliminate one page of front matter.

With so much competing for the attention of your target reader, a visual
cover gives your white paper better odds of getting noticed. For the
cover photo, use an appropriate shot that shows the target audience or
the dire consequences of the problem being tackled. If you make your
cover look as inviting as a magazine — so that members of your target
audience are itching to download it — it’s working.

A contents and copyright page shows the document’s framework at a
glance. This page also adds to the academic feel of your white paper,
suggesting its scholarly depth of research. You can just tuck your
copyright notice and any company contact information beneath the table
of contents. Don’t clutter up your copyright notice with any extended
legal verbiage about how this content “cannot be stored or transmitted
in any electronic system now known or invented in the future anywhere in
the universe . . . blah blah blah. . . .” That phrasing is
counterproductive. In fact, you want B2B buyers to copy the heck out of
your white paper, pass it around their companies, and send it to all
their peers, colleagues, and friends in the same industry. Don’t let the
lawyers write your marketing materials; they’re terrible at it.

A one-page executive summary sums up what to expect from the rest of the
paper. This summary serves to “tell them what you’re going to tell
them.” If you prefer, you can consider the executive summary as part of
the main body and not the front matter.

My colleague Jonathan Kantor wisely points out two types of executive
summaries: a preview of selected highlights intended to attract readers
to the full document, or a synopsis that provides a complete summary of
the paper. With a preview, you’re asking busy executives to tolerate
playing peek-a-boo with your ideas. I prefer the synopsis, because it
lets you lay out your entire argument in brief. If B2B buyers read only
that one page, at least they see your whole argument in a nutshell.

Sometimes, prospects copy the executive summary from a problem/solution
for other members of the selection committee. Or they may photocopy the
first page to include in a report to a C-level executive or capture the
text from your PDF and paste it into an e-mail. Think about it: A
manager asks a staffer to look into how their company can solve some
nagging problem, so the staffer finds a problem/solution white paper
full of helpful tips and insights. Why not give his manager a taste by
pasting the executive summary right into his report? What could be
better for a vendor than to have that one-page distillation of your
ideas in the hands of everyone at the boardroom table?

[tip.eps] Don’t make your executive summary any longer than a page, and
if you can keep it to half a page, so much the better. Everyone
appreciates conciseness.

Main body: Four to eight pages

The main body of the problem/solution is where you “tell them”; it’s
where you cover all the gritty details of the problem, describe the
failings of all the traditional solutions, and present your new,
improved solution.

Start this part with a serious, nagging problem that afflicts companies
in your target market. Describe it in some detail, showing its nasty
consequences and how it robs otherwise worthy companies of their
profits. Make sure it’s a problem that has gone unsolved for some time,
ideally a problem that your target reader is suffering from at this very
moment. Use statistics, anecdotes, and quotes from recognized experts,
publications, or trade associations to confirm the severity of this
problem.

This section should be at least one page long, perhaps two. If you go on
much more than two pages, you may tire out your readers; after all,
they’re looking for solutions, not an extended discussion of a problem
they already know well.

Sketch in all the traditional solutions that were tried over the years
for this problem. These represent all the competing notions cluttering
up your B2B buyer’s mind, and your job is to clear them all away.
Include anything a prospect can do besides use your offering, such as
doing nothing and letting the problem continue to eat away at the
foundations of the company. This section could include developing some
homegrown system or using existing office software and designing forms
or spreadsheets to fill in on paper. Include every single possibility,
leaving nothing out.

[remember.eps] Express these traditional solutions as categories,
classes, genres, or types of offerings, not specific products from named
competitors. Doing so keeps the tone elevated to a higher, more
analytical level where you can consider an entire market space, not just
a certain grab bag of products. Then list the drawbacks of each category
you identify, taking your best shot at every competing solution to clear
the field for your recommended solution.

This section is usually one or two pages long, although it can be
shorter. Often, you can set up and knock down an alternate approach in a
single sentence, or two at most. For example, in a problem/solution
white paper about engineering companies struggling to manage their
files, I dismissed every existing solution in just a few words:

Paper files are so easy to lose or misplace that most firms prefer to
manage their files electronically. According to an IDC study, paper is a
major source of information overload, and seven out of ten knowledge
workers prefer to deal with digital information.

Dispensing with whole categories this way keeps your white paper much
shorter than considering a whole parade of individual products one by
one. From this point on, you want your readers to lump any competing
product into one of the categories you dismissed in this section. You
want to shake their faith in that approach, permanently.

Describe your new, improved solution but only in generic terms. Staying
generic may feel strange, like speaking about your offering at arm’s
length, but it provides the key educational value of your paper instead
of resorting to a sales pitch. Talk about your offering as a new
category, class, genre, or type, or even a new generation, or at least a
significant upgrade or major tweak to what came before. Put off
mentioning your offering by name in this section, even though that may
feel counterintuitive. Your goal is to remain as vendor-neutral as you
can for as long as you can.

A buyer’s guide is a powerful element to include in every
problem/solution white paper. It doesn’t have to be elaborate; you can
format the buyer’s guide as a set of bullets, listing what to look for
in an ideal solution. Of course, you want to make sure every bullet
focuses on some unique selling point of your offering, something that
only you can do that gives you a definite competitive edge.

White paper author Michael Stelzner coined the phrase buyer’s guide for
this section, and he calls it “the most powerful and persuasive element
of the entire white paper.” This section is powerful because it can tilt
the entire playing field in your favor without making a blatant sales
pitch. Remember that every B2B selection committee needs to draw up a
list of requirements. If you give them a list for the taking, odds are
your list will influence their thinking; in the best case, they simply
take your list and use it for their own. And then your offering is bound
to score highly against their requirements!

[tip.eps] Mention your offering by name only after the buyer’s guide —
and then only to confirm that it’s an ideal solution that matches every
bullet in the buyer’s guide. Whatever you do, don’t devolve into a sales
pitch for your offering, because that can undo everything you achieved
by using the problem/solution flavor.

A case study that highlights the positive experience of an actual
customer with your offering is optional, but it can be powerful. You can
include a case study as a full page, a brief sidebar, or even a tiny
text box. You can include more than one or skip them entirely. Always
compress case studies down from their original size. If you originally
published a customer story as 800 words over two pages, boil it down to
100 words, or even 50 if you can, and then use it more like a proof
point.

Or if you want to feature a longer, more complex case study in a longer
problem/solution, set it up as a one-page sidebar with a graphic, a
different typeface, or a light tint of color behind it. For more tips on
designing sidebars, check out how magazines like Time or Scientific
American handle them.

Back matter: One to three pages

The back matter in a problem/solution white paper often includes these
elements: a set of conclusions, a call to action, info about the
company, and a list of the sources used in the paper.

A set of conclusions brings your problem/solution to a satisfying end by
“telling them what you told them.” This section briefly retraces the
main thread of your argument, accomplishing two things: It reinforces
the main messages for those who read all the way through, and it
provides another statement of the paper’s scope for those who flip to
the back first. Your conclusions should be half a page to a page, max.

At the very end of the conclusions, include a brief call to action. What
do you want the ideal reader to do after reading your white paper? The
answer is your call to action, which can be as short as a single
sentence to suggest what to do next, where to find more information, or
how to engage with your company to move deeper into the sales funnel.

Include a section about the company, drawn from the standard boilerplate
on your company’s website. Of course, at the very end, you probably want
to include contact details, such as the company phone number, e-mail
address, fax, Twitter feed, and company LinkedIn or Google+ pages.

If you use endnotes, they generally fall at the end of your document, if
only because Microsoft Word puts them there, and struggling with that
software any more than necessary is no fun. Some prefer to give
references in footnotes at the bottom of each page; others like to
gather all references together at the end of the document as endnotes.
Your writer can do either and format them according to your preferred
style. In a problem/solution, always include endnotes, footnotes, or at
least a list of sources so your readers know where your references come
from. Using credible sources gives B2B buyers a higher opinion of your
company — exactly what you want your white paper to accomplish.

Choosing an effective title

Coming up with a title for this flavor of white paper is critical. A
poor title can sink your efforts and limit your downloads, no matter how
strong the actual content. A good title gives your white paper a
fighting chance to get noticed, get downloaded, and make a difference.
What distinguishes a good title from a bad one? A good title spells out
the issue being discussed, specifies the target reader or industry, and
includes the benefits the reader will gain by downloading and reviewing
your document.

Knowing the problem, how nasty it is, and why your solution is better
than anyone else’s equips you to develop an effective title. Play around
with these elements by stating the problem and giving some new hope of
solving it in your title. If you can do so in a way that sounds natural,
include any keywords you’ve identified as likely search terms that will
lead your target readers to the white paper.

You don’t have to come up with the ultimate title when planning your
problem/solution white paper, but having a working title can be helpful,
especially if you’re juggling more than one white paper at once. Unlike
a numbered list, no formula exists for writing the title for a
problem/solution white paper, but here are some possible formats and
examples:

[check.png] A leading question: “Is Your Enterprise Buried in Paper?”

[check.png] A how-to: “How to Gain from Unattended Scanning”

[check.png] A metaphor: “Slaying the Paper-Burden Dragon”

[check.png] An imperative with clear benefits: “Save Time and Money with
Today’s New Generation of Unattended Scanners”

[check.png] A call to action: “The Time Is Right for Automated Filing
with Fifth-Generation Scanners”

[tip.eps] You can help generate leads by including a subtitle to clearly
identify who the white paper is aimed at. Pick the most compelling and
unifying factor about your target audience, such as your ideal readers’
job title, the industry they work in, their attitude toward the problem,
their region, or anything else that ties them all together. For example:

[check.png] “A White Paper for CIOs Being Asked about Unattended
Scanning”

[check.png] “A Special Report for Insurance Companies Suffering from
Paper Burden”

[check.png] “An Executive Briefing for ISP Executives”

[check.png] “A Research Report for Deans in Ivy League Colleges”

[truestory_property.eps] In a recent workshop, I handed out a
half-finished white paper and asked participants to give it the worst
title they could possibly imagine. The hands-down winner was “Acme and
You.” This title still makes me chuckle because it’s so awful in every
possible way. It gives no hint about the contents, no clue about the
target audience or industry, and no whiff of any benefit to readers. If
you take exactly the opposite approach, you’re on the right track to
naming your problem/solution white paper.

Setting a dignified tone

To achieve the goals you expect from a problem/solution white paper,
your document must maintain a certain tone: calm, logical, and, above
all, dignified. Where a numbered list can engage in sardonic commentary
or imaginative flights of fancy (see Chapter 7), a problem/solution must
stand firmly on solid ground, citing expert opinions and impeccable
statistics in the manner of a trial lawyer. Where a backgrounder can
zoom in on the inner workings of a certain offering (see Chapter 6), a
problem/solution must offer a sweeping vision of a nagging challenge
that faces many companies. The tone of a problem/solution white paper
must be engaging, of course, but never bombastic, comedic, or
over-the-top in any way.

Finding this middle ground isn’t easy for some writers, especially those
steeped in writing advertising copy or sales letters. A problem/solution
white paper explains a big issue in the manner of a magazine article and
persuades by using facts and logic, not calls to emotion. A seasoned
writer experienced with expository text should be able to hit the right
tone: not too flippant, not too plodding, but just the right mix of
facts, logic, imagery, and persuasion.

[remember.eps] Because problem/solution white papers are aimed at
business executives, they’re often passed up and down the corporate
ladder within companies. It may help to visualize your target readers
and write as though you’re giving a presentation in their boardroom or
having a discussion in their office. Don’t write as though you met up
for beers — that’s just too informal for this flavor.

Going Beyond Text in a Problem/Solution

The problem/solution flavor cries out for more than just text. Not
everyone learns best by reading, and your target audience has far too
much to read, too much to remember, and too much to deal with. In fact,
the typical executive has more than a full week’s work sitting on top of
his desk at any given time, not to mention constant interruptions from
staff, higher-ups, and customers, plus a daily flood of e-mails and
phone calls. My colleague Jonathan Kantor calls these readers “time- and
attention-challenged,” and he’s right. Do you really think your message
can get through all those distractions and lodge firmly in the mind of
your prospect if you present it as a wall of text?

I believe effective graphics make all the difference in a
problem/solution white paper. And in the future, rich media, like
animation, audio, and video, will likely become popular additions to
this flavor — just the same as toasted nuts, colorful sprinkles, or
chunky bits add even more excitement to a scoop of chocolate ice cream.
In the following sections, I discuss the role graphics and rich media
can play in a problem/solution white paper.

Using graphics in a problem/solution

Every problem/solution white paper needs at least one concept graphic
that clearly lays out the central argument of the document. This graphic
could be a flow diagram that sums up a process, a before-and-after
diagram that contrasts old and new approaches (see Figure 8-2), or a
glorified block diagram that shows the parts within the whole. Or you
could use a two-part diagram, where the first part shows the problem and
the second part builds on the first to show how the new, improved
solution solves the problem.

[9781118496923-fg0802.eps]

Illustrations courtesy of Aconex

Figure 8-2: An example of graphics that show the before and after
approaches.

White papers have evolved quickly over the past decade to become much
more visual. Today, at least half of all problem/solution white papers
have visual covers (see Figure 8-3), and this trend is bound to keep on
growing. You should plan on doing a little photo research to find a good
stock image that sets the scene for the content inside your white paper.

[9781118496923-fg0803.eps]

Illustrations courtesy of CellKnight, Aconex

Figure 8-3: Two eye-catching covers.

[tip.eps] A good source for stock photos with reasonable pricing and a
good indexing system is www.istockphoto.com. In just a few minutes, you
can find an appropriate cover photo for a problem/solution white paper.

I’m always amazed to see companies, large and small, invest thousands of
dollars to put together an effective problem/solution white paper but
then neglect to create a single graphic to go with it and not even
bother with a photo for the cover. What were they thinking? This
thoughtless lack of graphics can sink the effectiveness of the whole
document.

[tip.eps] When you’re designing or reviewing a white paper, think of it
as a magazine that’s supposed to include a mix of text and graphics.
Every page should have something to break up the text, and the best way
to break up a sea of gray is to include a graphic that sums up and
illuminates much of the surrounding text. And don’t discount sketches or
ideas you come up with on restaurant napkins or white boards because
they’re not “pretty” enough. Instead, give your rough sketches to a
professional artist or designer who can make them, literally, as pretty
as a picture.

Using rich media

Using rich media, such as animation, audio, or video, isn’t yet
commonplace in problem/solution white papers, as discussed in Chapter 3.
But I firmly believe rich media is coming to the world of white papers,
and the problem/solution is the most appropriate flavor to use it. You
can package rich media in many ways with narrative text, using a PDF as
a “container” for all types of content. In this way, the white paper
remains a single file that’s easy to download, e-mail, or otherwise
share with colleagues.

The effects of rich media in white papers will be profound. Instead of
static images, graphics could be animated in full color to show flows,
cycles, or growth and decline. Some or all of the text could be spoken
as audio through a mobile device to become the soundtrack for another
activity, like commuting, exercising, or gardening.

Imagine a clickable sidebar where B2B buyers can view a short video on
some aspect of the problem or watch the vendor’s CEO giving the
executive summary. Toward the end of the piece, a video testimonial
could provide a case study from a satisfied client, or a well-spoken
executive could state the conclusions and invite interested readers to
take the next step.

This next generation of white papers will be thrilling indeed, and the
problem/solution white paper will be the flavor that leads the way into
these exciting developments. For more on the possible futures of white
papers, see Chapter 3.

Repurposing a Problem/Solution

The problem/existing-solutions/best solution approach of this flavor
provides thought-provoking content you can readily repurpose in several
ways. For example, you can extract a few specific ideas to create a blog
post or placed article. You can create a slide deck and then use it for
a webinar or for a presentation at an industry conference. Some
marketing teams now create stand-alone videos to highlight the key ideas
from a problem/solution white paper and urge viewers to download it. The
rich content in a problem/solution flavor makes all this repurposing
possible, as I explore in the following sections.

Blog post

An effective problem/solution white paper contains so much interesting
content that you can use it to generate a multipart series of blog
posts. For example, one post can describe the industry-wide problem and
show how serious it is. The second can explain why the existing
solutions on the market don’t truly solve the problem. The third can
introduce your new, improved solution in a generic way, without a lot of
product mentions. You can even do a fourth post that lists what to look
for in an ideal solution. Each post in the series can link back to the
earlier posts and ahead to the next. And each post, of course, should
contain a link to find out more by downloading the entire white paper.

[tip.eps] You probably don’t want to paste every word from the white
paper into your blog. Four blog posts of 600 words each don’t quite
equal your entire white paper. Plan to leave extra details in the full
white paper for those who download it.

Placed article

A placed article is an opinion piece, column, or article published in a
trade magazine, newspaper, or on a website without any notice that it’s
vendor-sponsored content. Most often, a placed article gets a byline
from a marketing executive from the vendor. A placed article becomes a
win-win for both publisher and vendor: The publisher gets interesting
content for free, and the vendor gets a wider audience for its views.

You may find that placing a problem/solution white paper is more
difficult than placing a numbered list. If you happen to create a
mash-up of a numbered list–problem/solution — as in “6 Ways Paper Burden
Is Slowly Strangling Your Company and What to Do about It” — that should
prove interesting to editors and bloggers. (See Chapter 9 for details
about mashing up white papers.)

[tip.eps] Start at the top when you’re trying to place your
problem/solution white paper. Many publications ask for an exclusive,
meaning you can’t place the same piece with anyone else. Why waste your
single shot on a blog with 1,000 subscribers when you can shoot for a
magazine with 50,000 readers?

If you’ve never tried to place an article, check out the section about
placed articles in Chapter 7. That advice applies just as well to
placing a problem/solution; so do the tips about paying for publication.

Slide deck

Any problem/solution white paper can be repurposed as an effective slide
deck. Let’s face it, most slides are pretty boring. Your deck for a
problem/solution white paper should break out of this mold. Instead of
the usual plodding introduction, why not start off your deck with a
bang: a visual slide that illustrates the problem in gruesome detail.

Bad news travels fast, so when you start off a presentation by tackling
an industry problem head-on, most audience members sit up and take
notice. If that’s a problem they’re wrestling with, you’ll have their
undivided attention. Then use a couple more slides to show the extent of
the problem by extracting quotes or factoids from your white paper. Then
set up each alternate solution on a single slide, and knock it down on
the same slide, or perhaps the next one. All of this will keep your deck
moving along quickly in a logical way.

Finally, introduce your new, improved solution, but don’t plaster your
product name all over the screen. Talk about your solution in a generic
way as a new category, class, genre, type, generation, or innovation.
Show how it’s better, and prove it the same way you did in the white
paper. Then include a slide for a buyer’s guide. And only after you do
all of that, unveil your offering by name and confirm that it meets all
the criteria in the buyer’s guide.

Reserve your final slide for the call to action. If you’re giving the
presentation in person, have copies of the white paper available for
handouts — but only after your presentation is finished. If you’re
building the deck for an online demo or to run unattended at a trade
show, the call to action can be simply to download the white paper for
more details.

After you complete your slide deck, you can decide whether you want to
post it on the web on a slide-sharing site, such as SlideShare
(www.slideshare.com), SlideBoom (www.slideboom.com), or myBrainshark
(www.mybrainshark.com).

[warning_bomb.eps] Never start off your presentation with six or eight
slides “to give a little background about our company.” Doing so is a
gold-plated invitation to your audience to start checking messages on
their mobile devices. At this point in your show, nobody cares about
your company! They want to hear about their problem, why what they’re
doing doesn’t work, and what else they can possibly try. First, give
them useful content. Then, tell them about your company when they have a
reason to be interested.

Webinar

After you build an interesting slide deck, a webinar is a natural
follow-up. You don’t need much more than a title slide to welcome people
to the webinar, and the associated infrastructure to start taking
sign-ups online. You can follow your slides to move through the problem,
each traditional solution and its drawbacks, and your new, improved
solution in exactly the same order as in your white paper. One benefit
of an online webinar, if you enable this feature, is that anyone in your
audience can type in a question as you go, and you can make sure to
answer it.

[tip.eps] Record your webinar and make the recording available on-demand
through your website. You can also consider posting the entire webinar,
or some choice bits of it, on your company’s YouTube channel.

Conference presentation

If a problem/solution white paper is chocolate ice cream, a slide deck
is toasted nuts, and a webinar is whipped cream, then a talk at an
industry conference must be the cherry on top. With your white paper for
a handout or download after your talk, an executive from your company
can use your slide deck to give a thought-provoking presentation at an
industry event. That talk may stir up some controversy about the
drawbacks of the traditional solutions, but if your research was
thorough, your presenter should be able to hold his own against any
questioners.

[remember.eps] Presenting at industry conferences can be a big
credibility builder for smaller firms, so don’t overlook this likely way
to get even more return from your problem/solution white paper.

OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 9

Mashing Up Different Flavors

In This Chapter

[arrow] Combining white paper flavors to meet your needs

[arrow] Studying two flavor mash-ups that turn out well and two that
don’t

[arrow] Fixing a mash-up that goes wrong

Based on the three main flavors of white papers, you can create four
possible mixed flavors, or mash-ups. You can combine each flavor with
one other, or you can mix all three flavors together:

[check.png] Backgrounder (vanilla) + numbered list (strawberry)

[check.png] Numbered list (strawberry) + problem/solution (chocolate)

[check.png] Backgrounder (vanilla) + problem/solution (chocolate)

[check.png] Backgrounder (vanilla) + numbered list (strawberry) +
problem/solution (chocolate)

However, you must be careful about what you mash together. Not every
flavor goes well with all the rest. A numbered list (strawberry) adds a
light contrast that mixes well with either other flavor. But a
backgrounder (vanilla) and problem/solution (chocolate) don’t go well
together, because each has a completely different flavor. And trying to
mix all three flavors together generally turns into a mess, with too
many discordant flavors fighting for supremacy.

In this chapter, I describe when you may need to use a mash-up and give
some examples of how these mash-ups can be useful. Then I look at each
of the four possibilities, showing why two of these mash-ups turn out to
be tasty, while the other two usually make an unhappy mess. Finally, I
explain how to tell whether you’ve made a mess and how to fix it if that
happens.

Understanding Why You Need Mash-Ups

In an ideal world, marketers would have as much time, money, and energy
to publish as many white papers as they ever wanted to. That would be a
kind of heaven where people could eat as much ice cream as they wanted
all day long, in every flavor under the rainbow. But in the real world,
people have only limited time, money, energy, and attention. We can pile
only so many scoops on an ice-cream cone before they start melting all
over our hands or toppling over to fall on the street. Mash-ups can be a
good solution to the real-world problem of constraints by enabling your
company to, in effect, get a two-for-one deal: a single ice-cream cone
holding scoops of two different flavors.

You can work from your white paper’s intended purpose to zero in on the
ideal flavor for your particular challenge. But sometimes a “pure”
flavor can’t do everything you need. It’s easy to say, “Pick one main
goal and stick to it,” but what if you can’t? What if you have two goals
you want to accomplish but not enough in the budget for two separate
white papers? Or what if your manager tells you both goals are the same
priority, so you can’t just pick one over the other? What if you’d love
to do two white papers, one for each goal, but you simply don’t have the
time or resources to manage that? What if you can’t decide between
chocolate and strawberry, but really, really want some of each? In any
of these cases, a mash-up can be exactly what you need.

The following sections offer examples of how you can address two goals
in one white paper. However, don’t think that the goals I talk about
here are the only ones you can combine. You can mix and match any goals
in one white paper. The challenge comes in knowing which ones fit well
together and which ones are best avoided. I address those concepts later
in the chapter.

Supporting a product launch, plus attracting attention

Suppose you need to support a product launch and, at the same time,
attract attention to your company as an up-and-coming vendor in your
niche. You realize that a backgrounder is the best flavor to accompany a
product launch (see Chapter 6), while a numbered list is best at
attracting attention with provocative views (see Chapter 7). But you
can’t afford to do two separate white papers.

In this case, think about combining both flavors to produce a mash-up
with a title like, “6 Must-Have Capabilities of Unattended Scanning” or
“5 Things to Look for in Your Next Enterprise Scanner.” To support your
launch, organize this kind of white paper as a numbered list focused on
the specific innovations that your new product provides. At the same
time, you can declare these features must-haves that any competitive
product in your niche must provide, a provocative stand that can help
attract attention to your firm.

The liveliness of the numbered list format can help this white paper
circulate more widely than if it were a pure backgrounder with your
product name in its title. Meanwhile, the detailed product information —
perhaps a checklist confirming that your product delivers every
breakthrough capability — helps support the launch and educate your
market space about your new product. In these ways, creating this
mash-up helps you accomplish both goals at once.

Generating leads, plus raising your company’s profile

Suppose you have two goals, one short-term and one long-term: to
generate immediate leads now and, at the same time, to help your company
get noticed by potential buyers in the future. And say you’re in the
commercial insurance market where every deal has a lengthy sales cycle
of a year or more. In this case, getting your company on a buyer’s radar
now can mean getting a request for proposal (RFP) six months from now.
Both goals amount to the same thing: building sales and revenues. You
understand that a ­problem/solution is the best flavor for generating
leads (see Chapter 8), while a numbered list is best to help your
company raise its visibility (see Chapter 7). But you just can’t manage
two separate white paper projects on top of all your other marketing
campaigns.

In this case, consider combining both flavors in a mash-up with a title
something like “3 Profit-Sinks of Paper Burden and How to Avoid Them” or
“5 Simple Solutions to the High Cost of Paper Files for Insurers.” You
can structure this kind of white paper as a numbered list that deals
with several dimensions of a major problem, positioning your company as
a trusted advisor. This mash-up can generate leads by pulling prospects
into the top of your sales funnel, both now and for months to come. And
this mash-up can also appeal to prospects at the middle of the sales
funnel, helping your company earn a place on the shortlist of vendors to
receive the RFP they eventually send out.

Consider the advantages of this type of mash-up. The sparkle of the
numbered list can help this white paper attract attention by promising a
quick read on an essential topic. At the same time, the serious nature
of the ­problem/solution can help this white paper get taken more
seriously and have a longer life span than a pure numbered list.
Creating this mash-up helps you accomplish both goals at once.

Creating Tasty Mash-Up #1: Backgrounder + Numbered List

One mash-up that can be quite successful is a backgrounder (vanilla)
with a numbered list (strawberry). The lightness of the numbered list
can make a backgrounder more appealing to a wider audience at the middle
of the sales funnel, not just the bottom. Remember that vanilla and
strawberry mix well together, because both are relatively mild flavors
that complement one another nicely. In the following sections, I explore
the background–numbered list mash-up.

When to use this mash-up

Try this flavor combo when you want to lighten up and extend the reach
of a backgrounder with the appeal of a numbered list or to spread FUD
(fear, uncertainty, and doubt) on all the competing offerings — and when
you can’t spare the time, money, or attention to do two separate white
papers.

For example, I wrote one of these mash-ups called "EFM Evaluation Guide:
20 Must-Have Capabilities for a True Enterprise Feedback Management
System" that listed a set of desirable features for this particular
genre of software. It included a checklist to confirm that the white
paper sponsor had the most capable offering on the market, casting doubt
on every other product in that category. You can see this white paper at
www.thatwhitepaperguy.com/sample-white-papers.html.

What to include and what to leave out

In a backgrounder–numbered list mash-up, you probably want to include a
cover and perhaps a contents and copyright page as front matter. These
items signify that the paper is somewhat more ambitious than a pure
numbered list, where the front matter is more limited.

In the main body, make sure to include a brief introduction and then
provide a lot of specific details about the features and benefits of
your offering, all structured as a numbered list. For example, this type
of mash-up can be organized as a set of must-have features every buyer
should check for, a list of capabilities of the most advanced offerings
in your niche, a number of items not to overlook, or a set of questions
to ask every vendor, along with your answers for your offering. For back
matter, include some brief conclusions, your call to action, and some
brief boilerplate about the company.

Leave out any sweeping analysis of industry-wide problems and the
failings of competing products, except for brief mentions or short
sidebars. In this type of mash-up, you likely won’t need any buyer’s
guide, footnotes, or endnotes, which are chocolate-flavored elements
that can overwhelm this type of white paper with too much complexity.

Creating Tasty Mash-Up #2: Problem/Solution + Numbered List

The second mash-up that can work well is a problem/solution (chocolate)
with a numbered list (strawberry). The lightness of the numbered list
can undercut the seriousness of the problem/solution and broaden its
reach with the promise of a quick read. This mash-up can also appeal to
prospects at the middle of the sales funnel, not just the top. Remember
that chocolate and strawberry go well together, with the strawberry
serving as a light contrast to the richness of the chocolate. The
following sections show how to make a problem/solution–numbered list
mash-up work.

When to use this mash-up

Try this mix when you want to use the appeal of a numbered list to
provide a lighter take on a widespread problem and how to solve it or to
reach out to prospects both at the top and in the middle of the sales
funnel — and when you don’t have the time, money, or attention to do two
separate white papers to achieve these goals.

For example, I wrote one of these mash-ups called “3 Critical Challenges
on any ARRA Construction Project” that explained three common pain
points that companies were experiencing with U.S. stimulus projects
after the financial meltdown in 2008. The rest of the paper discussed
the drawbacks of every other solution and finally described the ideal
solution to this problem.

This format caught the attention of target readers, helped them
understand the source of their difficulties with these projects, and
proposed a solution they may never have considered: a relatively new
category of software called online collaboration platforms for
engineering project management. You can see this white paper at
www.thatwhitepaperguy.com/sample-white-papers.html.

What to include and what to leave out

In a problem/solution–numbered list mash-up, you probably want to
include a cover and perhaps a contents and copyright page as front
matter. These items signify that the current white paper is somewhat
more ambitious than a pure numbered list, where the front matter is more
limited.

Also at the front, make sure to include a brief executive summary where
you “tell them what you’re going to tell them.” Then sketch in the
industry-wide problem and the drawbacks of the existing solutions as a
numbered list. For example, you can build this type of mash-up around a
number of pain points caused by the problem, a set of hidden dangers
every buyer must avoid, a number of benefits B2B buyers can enjoy with a
better solution, or a set of questions to ask every vendor. For back
matter, always include some conclusions, your call to action, and the
boilerplate about the company.

In this type of mash-up, leave out any specific product mentions and
descriptions of particular features of your offering. These
vanilla-flavored elements can make a confusing mess of this mash-up by
introducing too many flavors at once.

Avoiding Two Messy Combinations

At the beginning of the chapter, I list four possible flavor mash-ups.
They all sound scrumptious, but in the world of white papers, two of
these mash-ups don’t turn out too well. Mashing together a backgrounder
(vanilla) and a problem/solution (chocolate) in one paper usually
creates more problems than it solves. And when you put all three flavors
together, your white paper can lose focus and confuse your reader. The
following sections elaborate on the issues with each of these
less-than-tasty mash-ups.

Messy mash-up #1: Backgrounder + problem/solution

This mix is really hard to get right, because each flavor has a
completely different emphasis. A backgrounder focuses on one product’s
particular features and benefits (see Chapter 6), while a
problem/solution describes a major industry problem and how to solve it
(see Chapter 8). In other words, a backgrounder is like using a
microscope to zoom in on some tiny details, while a problem/solution is
like using a telescope to see a distant horizon. The educational value
of a problem/solution can be diluted down by the product details of a
backgrounder, just like vanilla waters down the richness of chocolate.
And the complex tastes of a problem/solution can easily overwhelm a
backgrounder, just like chocolate can make vanilla seem awfully bland if
you serve a scoop of each flavor in the same bowl.

I suppose it’s natural for sales and marketing people to want to combine
these two flavors to convince everyone how a specific product solves a
sweeping industry problem. But this mash-up ignores a basic dilemma:
Those two approaches are aimed at buyers at different points in the
sales funnel. The problem/solution flavor seeks to pull fresh leads into
the top of the funnel, when they’re looking for a solution to a nagging
problem, not shopping for a specific product. The backgrounder supports
a technical evaluation by prospects near the bottom of the funnel, when
they’re actively seeking detailed product information, not looking for a
thoughtful overview of a major industry problem.

By mixing these two opposite flavors together, you’re forcing your
prospects to sort through a mess of content that isn’t what they ordered
when they downloaded your white paper. Most of them won’t bother to do
it. Instead, why not take care of your prospects by giving them the
content they’re most interested in at the time? You’ll get far better
results if you separate those two purposes, two audiences, and two
flavors and serve them up as two separate documents.

[tip.eps] A simple way to avoid either mess described in this chapter is
to just keep vanilla away from chocolate. Neither flavor mixes well with
the other, even if some strawberry is in the mix.

Messy mash-up #2: All three flavors in one

Although Neapolitan is a popular flavor of ice cream, this three-way
combo of vanilla, strawberry, and chocolate is exceedingly rare in the
world of white papers. In fact, it’s hard to imagine such a mishmash
satisfying any B2B buyer. How can you possibly combine the product
details of a backgrounder with a new, improved solution to an industry
problem, and then wrap it all up in a numbered list? How can you
possibly target buyers at the top, the middle, and the bottom of the
sales funnel all at once? And why would you want to try?

Combining all three flavors of white papers in one seems clearly
impossible. And every time I’ve been involved with a white paper that
tried to do the impossible, it turned out to be, well, impossible. Why
not do the more sensible thing and create separate marketing pieces with
corresponding campaigns that can satisfy prospects at each stage of the
sales cycle?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[truestory_property.eps] Sorting out a muddled mash-up

I was recently working on a white paper for a major software company. At
the start, the requirements sounded like a straightforward backgrounder,
describing the benefits of an updated product. But then my client
insisted on outlining the history of this market space, the problem the
product solved, and what to look for in an ideal solution. Okay, but now
it was sounding more like a problem/solution. As the content came
together, I pinpointed seven key factors that a successful product in
that space should offer. Hmmm . . . now it was becoming a numbered list.

The content was getting muddled, but I was too close to the project to
see why. As the reviewers went over the content, something felt like it
didn’t belong. In fact, we were mixing up all three flavors in one
document. Ultimately, the fix became clear: We dropped several pages of
the product-specific details, and the white paper evolved into a
workable mash-up of a numbered list–problem/solution. As a side benefit,
the length dropped from more than a dozen pages down to a more
manageable ten. And the final white paper was well received by its
target audience.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[remember.eps] In today’s self-serve era of marketing with online
content, most white paper readers find and download white papers to suit
their needs and interests at the moment. They know what kind of
information they seek. If they sense that a white paper isn’t for them,
based on little besides the title or perhaps the landing page, they
click away to something else that seems more appropriate to them, and
the moment is lost.

Fixing a Mash-Up That Doesn’t Taste Right

Clearly, some mash-ups taste better than others. So what happens when
you try something that just doesn’t work out? Fortunately, you can
usually fix a mash-up that goes wrong. The first step is often the
hardest: Take a brief pause from the project to determine what’s really
going on. Review your goals and the audience for your white paper. Are
you trying to cover too much or target B2B buyers at different points in
the sales funnel? After you recognize that you have a mash-up on your
hands that doesn’t work, you can set about fixing it. Doing so takes a
little effort. Just as saving a recipe that isn’t working can be
difficult, so too can saving a mash-up that goes wrong. But I show you
how in the following sections.

How to tell when you’ve made a mess

Did you ever bite into something that you just knew tasted funny? Where
the flavors didn’t blend together well but rather all pushed and pulled
against each other, like a riot happening in your mouth? How about
garlic ice cream; can you imagine? That’s what I’m talking about:
something that just doesn’t taste as yummy as you expect and contains
some flavor that shouldn’t be in there. Maybe it’s too spicy, too
bitter, too salty, or even too sweet. Whatever it is, the taste is off
balance and unsatisfying.

The same thing can happen with a white paper. You can mix up too many
flavors, or the wrong flavors, and create a mash-up that just doesn’t
taste right. The main problem is that the content is going in all
directions at once. Many companies, especially when they publish their
first-ever white paper, try to put too much into one document. As an
inevitable result, the flavors get diluted, the message gets muddled,
and no one is pleased with the results. Something “tastes funny” — but
it’s not always easy to tell exactly why.

[remember.eps] When a white paper just isn’t working, here are the two
most likely reasons:

[check.png] You’re mixing up two flavors that don’t mix properly, namely
a backgrounder and a problem/solution.

[check.png] You never decided which flavor to create in the first place,
so you’re mixing all three and muddling up the flavors.

In either case, the solution is the same. You must separate the various
flavors present in your draft, reconfirm your main purpose, and target
an audience at one point in the sales funnel. Then pick the right flavor
to achieve that purpose and use only the ingredients that belong in that
flavor, either dropping or rewriting everything else.

Separating the flavors

To separate the flavors in a mash-up that isn’t working, read through
your draft and highlight each flavor with a different color. You could
use pink for strawberry, orange or green for chocolate, and leave any
product information white for vanilla. To decide which flavor any
sentence, paragraph, or section belongs to, ask yourself whether it’s
more about your offering (vanilla) or more about an industry-wide
problem and a generic description of a new, improved solution
(chocolate). You likely won’t have a lot of material to highlight as a
numbered list (strawberry). If a sentence or paragraph could be one of
two different flavors, copy it and highlight each version with a color
so you can decide later.

After you highlight all the content in your original draft, quickly scan
your document to see whether one flavor predominates. If so, that’s a
strong clue about which flavor is more vital to your draft. If all the
colors are about the same proportion, it’s time to go back to your
original purpose as described in the next section.

Reconfirming your purpose

As explained in Chapter 5, you can work from your main purpose to pick
the ideal flavor for your white paper. Here are several classic goals
for a white paper and the best flavor for achieving each of them:

[check.png] To generate leads at the top of the funnel: problem/solution

[check.png] To attract attention with provocative views: numbered list

[check.png] To nurture prospects through the middle of the funnel:
numbered list

[check.png] To support an evaluation and cement sales at the bottom of
the funnel: backgrounder

Review what you’re trying to achieve with this project. Are you seeking
to accomplish two incompatible goals at once, such as addressing B2B
buyers at both the top and bottom of the sales funnel? Are you trying to
provide an industry overview and cover a specific product in the same
document? After you start asking these questions, the goal of your white
paper should pop out at you.

Using the ingredients that belong

At this point, you’re ready to rework your white paper in the correct
flavor. Now go back to your highlighted draft and eliminate or rewrite
all the parts that belong to any other flavors except your chosen one.
You can do this by either dropping the content tagged as any other
flavor or restating all those parts in a more or less product-specific
way — more product specific for a backgrounder or more generic for a
problem/solution. If you’re creating a numbered list, make sure every
numbered point is expressed in parallel or similar grammatical
construction. Whatever you do, you must take control of your material,
selecting content that interests your intended readers at the
appropriate part of the funnel.

At the end of this exercise, you should have a small pile of material
that you cut or couldn’t rework to fit into your revised draft, and a
new draft where every section, paragraph, and sentence fits with your
chosen flavor and helps to achieve your goal.

[tip.eps] When you fix a mash-up that doesn’t work and have some of your
original draft left over, that content doesn’t have to go to waste. You
can likely use it in another white paper or repurpose it for a blog post
or e-newsletter article.

OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 10

Special Ingredients for a White Paper

In This Chapter

[arrow] Using special ingredients that make a white paper more memorable

[arrow] Avoiding bitter ingredients that can ruin a white paper

Everyone knows there’s more to the world of ice cream than standard
flavors like vanilla, strawberry, and chocolate. To whip up a truly
memorable treat, you need to add some special ingredients, like
multicolored sprinkles, toasted nuts, bananas, hot gooey sauce, whipped
cream, and a bright red maraschino cherry to top it all off. For more
adult tastes, a pinch of pepper or a splash of vodka can wake up a dish
of ice cream and create a magical moment.

The same is true for a white paper: Special ingredients can help your
white paper jolt your readers awake and truly step up to become more
memorable than any other document they may encounter. The yummy special
ingredients you can use in a white paper include a positioning blurb, an
executive summary, numbered or bulleted lists, a buyer’s guide, one or
more case studies, and a set of conclusions with an effective call to
action.

In this chapter, I provide tips and tricks on using these special
ingredients, and I warn against some ingredients that can turn the
sweetest white paper into a bitter concoction that no one can swallow,
including hype, marketing speak, groupthink, vagueness, product
mentions, and attacks on competitors.

Sprinkling on the Special Ingredients

As you become more adept at developing white papers, you’ll naturally
tend to look for ways to make them more persuasive. I’ve found that many
of the tips I’ve picked up combine both structure and content; you must
include a certain element at the proper place in the proper flavor of
white paper (structure) and you must word it correctly to get the best
possible results (content).

In the following sections, I describe how to use the special ingredients
that can help make your white papers more memorable and persuasive.
Arranged more or less in the order they occur in a white paper, these
elements include a positioning blurb, a synopsis-style executive
summary, numbered or bulleted lists, case studies, a buyer’s guide, and
conclusions that incorporate an effective call to action.

You don’t have to use all these ingredients in every white paper,
although in any type of problem/solution, you certainly can. I do
recommend using an executive summary and a set of conclusions in pretty
much every white paper, so you can “tell them what you’re going to tell
them” at the start and then “tell them what you told them” at the end.
And every white paper should include a brief call to action that
outlines exactly what your reader should do next.

Positioning blurb

A positioning blurb is a short sentence or two that sums up a company or
an offering to help a B2B buyer understand how it fits into a broader
landscape of a certain market space. A major failing of many technology
companies — and the white papers they publish — is never providing an
effective positioning blurb. Without it, prospects must work hard to
decode the messages from those vendors and sort their way through a lot
of sound-the-same jargon that does nothing to make them stand out from
the crowd.

A positioning blurb is a must-have ingredient for any backgrounder. In
the introduction to a backgrounder, make sure to position the offering
in its market space. If the company doesn’t already have an effective
positioning blurb for that offering, use this simple formula to create
one:

[Name of product or service] is a [down-to-earth adjective] [recognized
niche, category, or genre] that [active verb, such as provides,
delivers, or performs] [number-one benefit covered in white paper] to
[primary target market].

If you want, you can add the following clause to the end of your blurb,
as long as you don’t resort to any hype or exaggeration:

unlike other [products, services, or solutions] which [number-one
failing of number-one competitor]

Here’s a blurb written to this formula, suitable for popping into the
introduction to a backgrounder (and anywhere else you need a concise,
factual blurb):

The Acme ScanOMatic 3000 is a cost-effective unattended scanning system
that delivers ultra-high-resolution e-copies to office staff buried in
paperwork, unlike other systems that demand frequent manual
intervention.

[remember.eps] Many CEOs spend hours wondering, “How can we make our
company stand out from the competition?” The answer? To stand out, you
have to do something different. You have to clearly say what your
company does, who your company does it for, and why your company does it
the best, and then prove it to hardheaded B2B buyers. White papers
provide an excellent channel for this discussion. But if your company
doesn’t do much of anything different from a dozen other companies, it
will be hard to stand out from your competitors and hard for any white
paper to help you over this challenge.

Synopsis-style executive summary

An executive summary is essential at the beginning of any type of
problem/solution white paper, either pure or a mash-up with a numbered
list. These are less common in backgrounders or shorter numbered list
white papers. The two types of executive summaries are a preview and a
synopsis. Just like the preview for a movie, a preview executive summary
presents selected highlights of what’s to come, trying to attract
readers and entice them to read the main body. A synopsis takes a
different tactic, presenting the entire argument of the document in a
nutshell. I much prefer the synopsis for the following reasons:

[check.png] You’re not playing peekaboo with your content, which can
irritate busy readers and waste their time. You’re being transparent and
helpful.

[check.png] Getting an executive to see a one-page summary of your
entire argument is better than presenting just a few scattered
highlights with no chance for you to connect the dots.

[check.png] If your company has any special fans on the selection
committee, you’re giving them a self-contained piece of content that’s
easy to repurpose. They can add the executive summary to their research
or notes for the next meeting of the committee, which gets your key
message into the hands of everyone around the boardroom table.
Excellent!

[tip.eps] Whichever approach you choose for your executive summary, the
shorter the better. A full page is as long as you ever want, and if you
can boil it down to a half a page, so much the better.

Numbered lists

Three types of white papers are organized around numbered points: a pure
numbered list, a numbered list–backgrounder mash-up, or a numbered
list–problem/solution mash-up. And you may well want to use a numbered
list within the body of another flavor. Here are seven tips on using
numbered points effectively, in a form that follows all these tips:

[check.png] Tip #1: Use at least three and at most nine points. Any less
than three isn’t really a list, and any more than nine can get too long
and tire out your readers.

[check.png] Tip #2: Don’t use ten points. Let’s face it: David Letterman
owns the Top Ten List format, after featuring one on his show every
night for more than 25 years. So unless you want to sound like a David
Letterman wannabe, drop your weakest point and end your list at nine.

[check.png] Tip #3: Consider using an odd number. Some marketing experts
recommend using odd numbers like three, five, or seven, rather than even
numbers like four, six, or eight. They claim that odd numbers are more
believable because even numbers strike some people as too “round” or
“neat.” Personally, I wouldn’t drop a strong point just to make an odd
number of points. But I would drop every weak point and see where your
list naturally ends.

[check.png] Tip #4: Break a longer list in two. If you have many more
than ten points and they all seem worth keeping, consider breaking your
list in two. You can call the first one something like, “7 Things You
Must Know About . . .” and the second, “6 More Things You Must Know
About . . .” An added benefit of this approach is that it gives you two
pieces of content to promote, and the call to action of the first part
can be to download the second.

[check.png] Tip #5: Express all points in parallel. Line up all your
points in the same grammatical format. For example, notice how all the
points in this section are in the same imperative form, like “do this”
or “don’t do that.” (See the nearby sidebar for a detailed example.)

[check.png] Tip #6: Don’t scrimp on your research. Just because a
numbered list is supposed to carry a somewhat lighter tone, it doesn’t
mean you can take any shortcuts on your research. Just like in any other
flavor, the more proof you can find for each of your numbered points,
the more punch each point will deliver.

[check.png] Tip #7: Organize your points for maximum impact. Put a
couple of strong points at the start, any weaker points in the middle,
and another strong point at the end. This order reflects how people scan
numbered lists: They tend to pay attention at the start, skip through
the middle, and then focus again at the end. So make sure to end your
list with a bang, not a whimper.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Lining up bullets in parallel form

You can make any list faster to scan and easier to understand if you
present it in parallel construction. This means using the same
grammatical form for each point. Here’s an example of points not written
in parallel:

[check.png] Red means stop; yellow means warning.

[check.png] To be safe, you must always cross when the light is green.

[check.png] If the light is yellow, someone could be turning late from
oncoming traffic. It’s safer to stop.

See how each item in this list is in a different format, with a
different length? Can you see how this format makes your reader work
much harder to decode each item? Here’s one way to recast this list in
parallel:

[check.png] Red means stop: You are not safe to cross.

[check.png] Green means go: You can cross safely.

[check.png] Yellow means caution: You should stop.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Buyer’s guide

This unique ingredient occurs most often in the problem/solution flavor.
The buyer’s guide is a concise set of bullets, listing your competitive
advantages as must-have features or characteristics that all buyers
should look for. By serving as a checklist for buyers, this section aims
to tilt the playing field in favor of your offering. A buyer’s guide is
usually confined to a single page or even half a page. You don’t need a
lot of extra verbiage around it. In fact, you can introduce a buyer’s
guide like this: “Here are some must-have features that any automated
scanner should provide.”

Remember to express each item in more or less generic fashion, not using
product-specific or company-branded terms. Doing so makes the list more
appropriate as a checklist. After all, it’s more useful to your
prospects if you describe an item in the buyer’s guide as “quick,
automated setup for unattended operation” instead of using
company-specific terms, such as “Auto-Scan Sensor configuration for
unattended operation.”

[tip.eps] A buyer’s guide can also help you structure a backgrounder. In
this case, instead of a set of bullets gathered together on one page, it
becomes a series of sections, each one discussing another must-have
feature.

[warning_bomb.eps] Don’t include items in your list that any competitor
can easily claim. For example, don’t use any namby-pamby phrases, such
as “We are 100 percent committed to customer service.” This statement is
meaningless. What company would ever admit that it’s only 65 percent
committed to customer service? Stick to any areas where you clearly
outperform your competition and can prove it convincingly.

Case studies

A case study is a testimonial from a happy customer who used a company’s
offering and was pleased with the results. This kind of third-party
evidence is one of the most compelling proofs any B2B vendor can offer.

A case study works well in a problem/solution and perhaps in a
backgrounder. You can format a case study as a full-page sidebar, a
paragraph or two in the main body, or a small text box on the side of a
page. The length is up to you; just make a case study as short as
possible while still delivering an effective testimonial.

Case studies don’t work so well in a numbered list because any type of
sidebar tends to break the rapid flow of this format. In this flavor,
sidebars are more like an interruption, distraction, or unnecessary
aside, so they’re seldom used.

Conclusions

A brief set of conclusions is useful in almost every flavor of white
paper. Here, you “tell them what you told them” and give readers the key
take-away messages from your document. The conclusions should be no more
than a page and preferably shorter. In a backgrounder, you can offer a
short conclusion to emphasize how all these features and benefits add up
to the best offering on the market. In a problem/solution, you can sum
up the problem, the drawbacks of the traditional solutions, and your new
improved solution in just a few clipped sentences.

[tip.eps] The one flavor where you can safely skip any conclusions is a
pure numbered list that you want to keep as short as possible. Shaving
off that final half page can make a difference. And if your main goal is
to cast aspersions on the competition, you can do that within your
numbered points with no need to sum it all up at the end.

[remember.eps] Although adding conclusions may seem nonessential,
they’re a must-have for almost any white paper because many business
readers flip to the end before they commit to reading the main body.
Magazine publishers have been encouraging this behavior for many years
because they want readers to look through the entire issue and notice
all the ads right to the back. That’s why they often include a humor
piece, cartoon, or popular columnist on the very last page. For example,
Vanity Fair places its popular Proust questionnaire filled in by a
celebrity on that page. The New Yorker often features a full-page
cartoon there. And many trade journals place their most popular
columnist in that position to compel readers to flip right to the last
page.

Call to action

Every effective piece of marketing material has some sort of call to
action. Nothing should ever stand alone; instead, every piece should
contribute toward pulling prospects into your funnel and on toward the
next step in the sales cycle. That’s why you should include a brief call
to action at the end of your conclusions. The call to action can be a
single sentence describing where to find more information or how to move
to the next step in the buying process. Here’s a formula for writing a
call to action:

To find out more about how [name of offering] can help your [business,
organization, or team] [number-one product benefit covered in white
paper], [do something].

Here’s a call to action written to this formula:

To find out more about how the Acme ScanOMatic 3000 can help your team
clear away a blizzard of paperwork, call 1-800-SCANNER.

Of course, not every prospect is quite ready to order dozens of scanners
just yet, so an intermediate step in your call to action is usually
better. One neat tactic is to come up with an online survey, widget, or
calculator that can make an engaging call to action that brings your
prospect back to your company website for more interaction:

To find out how much your team can save this year by using the Acme
ScanOMatic 3000, visit www.acme-scanners.com/ROI-calculator.

Leaving Out the Bitter Ingredients

Four nasty ingredients can spoil even the sweetest white paper: hype,
marketing speak, groupthink, and vagueness. Leave all these
bitter-tasting elements out of every white paper you produce. This rule
applies firmly to all backgrounders and problem/solution flavors.

In a numbered list designed to be provocative, you can ever so slightly
bend these rules. Don’t try this technique on the first numbered list
you create. Wait until you feel more confident and then experiment a
little with a light sprinkling of hyperbole. You must use a subtle hand
so no one actually detects that special ingredient but instead notices
only how your paper has some extra zest. If you overdo it, the entire
dish can be ruined.

Two other ingredients can go only in certain flavors and must be used
with much caution: product mentions and direct attacks on competitors.
Using either of these two ingredients — or hype — is like using cayenne
pepper: A little goes a long, long way. If you put in even a bit too
much, some of your guests will turn red, clutch their throats, and gasp
for air. Clearly, that’s not the reaction you want your white paper to
generate.

Hype

Hype is short for hyperbole, a rhetorical device from the ancient Greeks
that means literally “excess” or “over the wall.” If you think of hype
as “over the top,” you’re on the right track. It’s a big ball of wishful
thinking, breathless exaggeration, and downright lying.

Don’t forget that B2B buyers have three major questions on the tip of
their tongue every instant: “So what?” “Says who?” and “What’s in it for
me?” If you try to use hype to slip some shaky claims or assertions past
them, you may trigger one or all of these questions to spring up in
their mind. After you trigger their doubt the first time, you may never
regain their trust. And they may never finish reading your white paper.
Is that really worth the risk?

Here are some examples that should have your personal “hype detector”
sounding a red alert:

[check.png] “Our best-selling network analyzer . . .”

But what if this phrase comes from a company that sells only two
different network analyzers? If one is the best seller, the other must
be the failure that no one ever buys.

[check.png] “A vast majority of IT managers prefer commercial software
over open-source code. . . .”

But where is the actual statistic, the methodology, or the name of the
study’s sponsor? Could this research have been paid for — and the
results skewed — by some company that just happens to perceive open
source as a threat?

[check.png] “Our most comprehensive update ever! Complete with 89 new
and improved features!”

But does that number include many long-advertised features that now work
properly for the first time, because the company finally got around to
fixing the bugs?

Can you see how hype falls apart under the withering gaze of a skeptic?
Don’t think you can fool all the people some of the time and some of the
people all the time; in a white paper, you can’t. And by the way,
multiple exclamation marks (!!) or other over-the-top punctuation (?!)
are sure signs of hype.

[warning_bomb.eps] Hype is totally inappropriate in a backgrounder,
where readers are looking for precise technical details and real-world
benefits. In a backgrounder, you must stick to the facts and prove your
assertions with facts, like benchmarks, client testimonials, patents,
specs, test results, and anything from the real world and not the misty
world of make-believe. When you exaggerate with hype in a backgrounder,
you risk losing your audience.

Marketing speak

Marketing speak refers to the polite, politically correct, and almost
indecipherable prose that makes so much copywriting so bloated.
Marketing speak encompasses all the tired clichés, buzzwords, and empty
superlatives found in many press releases, web pages, and brochures. But
a white paper isn’t a press release, a web page, or a brochure! A white
paper is supposed to help your readers understand an issue, solve a
problem, or make a decision. Marketing speak won’t help your readers
achieve any of those goals.

One problem with marketing speak is that it’s just a set of empty terms
that don’t explain anything or offer any value to readers. So what if
you claim to have the “best-in-breed point solution for seamless
integration with enterprise web 2.0 platforms”? Does all that jargon
actually paint a clear picture of what you’re talking about? Not to most
people. If you don’t already understand all those terms and somehow know
what the writer means by that particular string of them, you’re out of
luck. This isn’t white paper writing; this is just blather and
bafflegab.

Another problem is that marketing speak isn’t plain language; it’s
puffed-up mumble jumble that goes around the block instead of coming
right out and saying what it means. That makes marketing speak
inefficient at delivering any real content. When every customer is a
“stakeholder,” every problem is a “concern,” and every bug is an
“issue,” readers have to work hard to crack through an extra layer of
coding and get down to the actual message.

[warning_bomb.eps] All in all, marketing speak only slows down readers
and wastes their time. Any white paper that wastes prospects’ time with
marketing speak is gambling with their patience. B2B buyers from
technical fields like engineering or IT have an especially low tolerance
for this kind of language. If you use too much of it, they may strike
your company off the shortlist of vendors to pursue. Then your marketing
speak has done the exact opposite of what you wanted: Instead of
nurturing prospects, it has killed their interest.

[tip.eps] You may be under pressure from sales or marketing colleagues
or your client to stick loads of marketing speak into your white paper.
If so, remember the three Rs: resist, reinterpret, and reword. Push back
against these pressures, using the arguments in this section. If that
doesn’t work, get to the bottom of what the marketing speak is really
trying to say, and then state that message in more direct and accessible
terms in your text.

By all means, try to avoid using any of the following classic examples
of marketing speak:

[check.png] Best-of-breed

[check.png] Best practices

[check.png] Breakthrough

[check.png] Concern

[check.png] Cloud computing

[check.png] Cutting-edge

[check.png] Disruptive

[check.png] Enterprise-class

[check.png] Evolutionary

[check.png] Global

[check.png] Granular

[check.png] Groundbreaking

[check.png] Issue

[check.png] Leader

[check.png] Leading/Leading-edge

[check.png] Next-generation

[check.png] Next step in evolution

[check.png] Outside the box

[check.png] Paradigm/paradigm shift

[check.png] Premier

[check.png] Proactive

[check.png] Revolutionary

[check.png] Right-sizing

[check.png] Robust

[check.png] Seamless integration

[check.png] Secret sauce

[check.png] Smart

[check.png] Stakeholder

[check.png] State-of-the-art

[check.png] Strategic alliance

[check.png] Transformative

[check.png] Unique

[check.png] User-friendly

[check.png] World-class

Groupthink

What do you call a group of people who all follow the leader without
question? Lemmings? Zombies? Don’t let your backgrounder or
problem/solution white paper get spoiled by groupthink. One common form
of groupthink occurs when everyone on a management team — and any new
hires the team brings onboard — walks around all day telling one
another, “We have the best technology. We have the best product line. We
have the most responsive tech support. We have the strongest management
team.” But just because an executive says something doesn’t make it so.

After all, this language is rather like saying, “Everybody knows that .
. .” or “All right-thinking people agree that . . .” The job of any
white paper writer is to turn a critical eye to these flimsy claims and
say, “Oh yeah? Prove it!” If you have no proof beyond an oft-repeated
management cliché, that statement has no place in a white paper. The
most common form of groupthink is an unproven claim.

[remember.eps] Instead of making an unverified assertion, you must dig
for convincing proof points: awards, benchmarks, case studies, reviews,
and so on. If you can’t find actual numbers, use a quote from a
third-party expert, such as an industry analyst, respected consultant,
or leading authority in your field. Then your claim will have more
credibility and more impact, and you can leave the groupthink to the
walking dead.

Vagueness

If “God is in the details,” then so is the compelling content for a
white paper. Nebulous, fuzzy statements have no place in any flavor.
Consider this: Prospects deep in the buying process download a
backgrounder to get technical details they can’t find anywhere else.
They don’t want brochure-style fluff; they’re looking for precise
technical details and concrete business benefits. The same applies to a
problem/solution reader. If you describe an industry-wide problem by
using only broad strokes, your paper is not nearly as compelling as if
you fill in the fine points. And with a numbered list, if all your paper
can offer is shadows, smoke, and opinion, it won’t be nearly as
provocative as if it’s grounded in specific facts.

Vagueness isn’t “sticky” like a gooey fudge sauce. It doesn’t hold onto
readers; instead, ambiguities invite them to get distracted and go on to
something else. For example, suppose you describe an industry problem
this way:

Many companies struggle with the problem of paper burden. Reports,
forms, and e-mail attachments continue to proliferate. Most companies
now use off-site storage to hold a growing volume of paper files.

Ho hum! Tell me something I don’t know. This lazy text has nothing to
hold anyone’s attention. You can make this same idea riveting by
introducing some specifics:

Despite high-speed access to the web, the typical office worker still
prints 10,000 pages a year and then squirrels away 2,500 pages in files.
Experts say that all that paper drains more than $50 billion a year from
our nation’s productivity.

Wow! This version will likely get a reader’s attention and hold it.
Finding some eye-popping statistics like these is one way to eliminate
vagueness, but not the only one. Also look for anecdotes, dates, times,
places, provocative quotes, or anything else that makes a fuzzy
statement more clear and defined. Any of those ingredients can eliminate
the vagueness that invites readers to drift away.

Product mentions

You can freely use this ingredient in one flavor but not the others. You
can mention a product name in the title and on every page of a
backgrounder because your readers expect this flavor to focus on the
features and benefits of a specific offering. And you can use product
mentions throughout a mash-up of a backgrounder and numbered list called
something like “5 Things You Should Know about the Acme ScanOMatic
3000.”

But in a pure numbered list, you can get away with mentioning a specific
offering only right near the end. Otherwise, stay focused on the issue
your numbered list is describing; if you don’t, readers may sense that
you’re handing them a thinly veiled sales pitch and reject your white
paper.

The same applies to a problem/solution or problem/solution–numbered list
mash-up. Make sure to leave product details out of these flavors. Keep
them focused on the business or technical problem and how to solve it.
Your goal with these flavors is to describe a new, improved solution to
an industry problem in somewhat generic terms. This content must
intrigue your readers enough that they want to take the next step and
seek out more details. You want to pull them into your funnel, not
overload them with product information at the wrong time.

Direct attacks on competitors

You must use direct attacks on competitors carefully. Remember: A white
paper of any flavor is a persuasive essay based on facts and logic. Many
attacks on competitors aren’t grounded in provable facts or solid logic
but in emotion (“Our product is insanely great!”), ego (“We’re the
leader, and they’re just second-rate imitators.”), unverified claims
(“Our product runs 500 percent faster.”), or the other ingredients I
warn you about in this chapter, like hype or vagueness.

A backgrounder can support a few well-founded attacks on competing
offerings, if yours is clearly superior in some way. Just remember that
a technical evaluator wants to find out about your product, not your
competitor’s. If you focus too much on any competitor, that can arouse
your readers’ suspicions and compel them to go check out that
competitor. You can always say something like, “Unlike competing
solutions, Acme provides . . .” and then describe one of your unique
competitive advantages. But I don’t advise a full frontal attack on a
competitor in a backgrounder. It’s not the time or the place.

A numbered list doesn’t attack competitors directly. This flavor is more
about sowing doubt and uncertainty and making your reader suspect “5
hidden gotchas” or find out “7 things you must know.” If this flavor can
accomplish that, it doesn’t need to confront the competition directly.

In a problem/solution flavor, you can freely attack any competing
offerings as generic categories, classes, generations, or types of
solutions. You do this by describing how poor these solutions have been
at solving an industry-wide problem and then showing how your new,
improved solution does a far better job. As always, the more proof you
can pile up, the better. Here, you’re not directly attacking your
competition by name but giving a thoughtful critique based on how your
solution and others’ fit into your market space. Approaching any
competing offerings in this way helps build the educational value of
your white paper and establish your credibility as a trusted advisor.

OceanofPDF.com

Part III

From Foggy Idea to Finished Document

12 Steps for Creating a White Paper

1. Assemble the team.

2. Hold the initial conference call.

3. Prepare the plan.

4. Gather your research.

5. Prepare an executive summary.

6. Create the first draft of the paper and graphics.

7. Get the first round of feedback.

8. Revise to create the second draft.

9. Solicit a second round of feedback.

10. Collect and check sources.

11. Prepare the final document.

12. Wrap up the project.

[pt_webextra_bw.TIF] Find out how technology can help you generate
ideas, organize your thoughts, and get your words on paper more quickly
at www.dummies.com/extras/whitepapers.

In this part . . .

[check.png] Get an overview of a proven 12-step process for completing a
white paper that can help you avoid pitfalls and prevent a lot of
stress.

[check.png] Find out how to plan your next white paper and make sure all
contributors are working toward the same goal.

[check.png] Get busy writing, revising, and polishing your white paper
so it meets the needs of your target audience and client.

OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 11

A Proven Process to Complete Your White Paper

In This Chapter

[arrow] Understanding the benefits of a white paper publishing process

[arrow] Reviewing the three main stages of publishing a white paper

[arrow] Improving your white paper success rate with six key factors

[arrow] Taming four pests that can devour your white paper

Publishing B2B white papers can be an effective way to generate leads,
nurture prospects, or cement sales. But developing a white paper is a
complex project with many players to coordinate and many stages to
oversee. These players include a sponsor, subject matter experts,
reviewers, a writer, a designer, perhaps an illustrator, plus a
marketing team. These stages include planning, researching, drafting,
illustrating, reviewing, designing, and promoting the final document.
Not everyone understands how to pull together all these resources or
manage all these stages to make developing a white paper smooth and
enjoyable. That’s where this chapter comes in.

In this chapter, I give an overview of the proven process I’ve used for
many years with my own clients and show the benefits you can gain from
adopting it. I sketch in the three main stages of creating an effective
white paper: planning, producing, and promoting. Each stage includes a
number of steps, as explained in Chapters 12, 13, and 16. I round out
this chapter by discussing six critical factors that can help your white
paper succeed and four pesky varmints you must guard against.

Benefitting from a White Paper Process

White papers are complex projects with many variables to control. In
many cases, the publishing process is painful, and the results are less
than compelling. After experiencing a few projects that didn’t turn out
well, I began to study what was going wrong and how I could improve the
outcomes.

Eventually I saw the light: B2B vendors have publishing tools at their
fingertips; many people have good skills to apply. Most marketing teams
can effectively handle smaller projects such as press releases, web
pages, or e-newsletters. But few know how to publish something as big
and challenging as a white paper.

Gradually, I came up with a process that I’ve been able to field-test
and fine-tune on dozens of projects. Following any organized process is
better than nothing, and following my time-tested process can boost your
success rate on four out of five white papers.

The following sections look at the pitfalls that can derail a white
paper and explain the benefits of putting a proven process in place.

Not all white paper projects go smoothly

When I first started writing white papers in the late 1990s, not all my
projects worked out as I hoped:

[check.png] A few were painfully slow, as I went through revision after
revision, chasing after a moving target in my client’s mind.

[check.png] Several had engaging text that was undermined by a wretched
format imposed by designers inexperienced with white papers.

[check.png] One was ruined when the CEO dropped in late in the process
and insisted we turn it into a sales pitch.

Any seasoned white paper writer can tell you similar stories. Writers
and marketing managers can fall into many pitfalls that cause delays,
misunderstandings, or even the outright cancellation of a white paper.
Nobody wants that, but it happens often.

Many companies lack a publishing process

After specializing in white papers for a few years, I had a blinding
flash of the obvious. I realized that the real reason so many white
papers flounder isn’t some lack of creativity, intelligence, or design
skills. The real cause is an unpredictable or chaotic publishing process
— or no process at all — so the best thinking of the client and the best
practices of the industry aren’t captured in the final document.

The tools of publishing are now available to anyone with a PC or tablet.
But tools without experience aren’t enough. Many B2B vendors lack enough
knowledge about publishing to make the process go smoothly and create an
effective white paper. In traditional publishing, writers, editors, and
designers work with processes that have been tested, refined, and proven
effective for hundreds of years. From working in traditional newspaper,
magazine, and book publishing, I was well acquainted with these
processes. And I realized that many B2B companies have nothing similar
in place.

This insight was confirmed by a 2010 survey by MarketingSherpa, which
showed that 60 percent of small companies and 47 percent of medium-sized
companies with up to 1,000 employees have no formal processes they
routinely follow for B2B marketing. They’re all making it up as they go
along. Surprisingly, more than one-third of larger enterprises with more
than 1,000 employees are in the same boat. So if your company has no
white paper publishing process in place, the good news is that you’re
probably in the same place as many of your competitors. The bad news is
that with no time-tested process to guide you, developing a white paper
can be a bewildering and unmanageable process.

A process you can use for your own

I determined to do something to help B2B vendors handle white papers
better. I reviewed dozens of my projects to figure out what worked and
what didn’t, where things had gone smoothly and where things were a
little rough. I set down a preliminary version of this process and
started using it with my clients, refining it as I went. For the past
several years, I’ve used this process without any significant changes.
By now, the process explained in this part of the book has helped me
complete dozens of white papers faster and easier than I would have
believed possible. And it can do the same for you.

Consider the likely benefits if you adopt this process:

[check.png] You can clearly set expectations among the client, writer,
reviewers, and any other parties in advance.

[check.png] You can head off all the most common problems and pitfalls
that can bedevil any white paper project.

[check.png] You can avoid misunderstandings and assumptions that can
blow up in your face.

[check.png] You can spell out what to do next, which is extremely useful
when you’re juggling numerous projects — and who isn’t?

[check.png] You can streamline a complex white paper project and achieve
a much better chance of success.

I find that 18 or 19 out of 20 white papers flow smoothly with this
process; that’s a 90 or 95 percent success rate. I expect this process
to work well for at least four out of five of your white papers so that
you enjoy a success rate of at least 80 percent. And studying this
process will help you see why that fifth one took longer or didn’t go as
smoothly. When something messy and unpredictable does come along, this
process can guide you as you try to get your project back on track.

[remember.eps] Real-world factors can conspire to knock the best-planned
projects off course. No tidy, step-by-step process can possibly
encompass all the twists and turns the world can throw at it. So why try
to impose any process on something so flaky? The truth is, every
marketing team has a process — even if they’ve never written down any
steps, drawn up any flowcharts, or done anything besides simply making
it up as they go along. But making the process explicit, visible, and
predictable is better than leaving it implied, invisible, and ad hoc.

Getting an Overview of the Process

The chapters in Part III give you a step-by-step process for creating a
white paper, covering everything from clarifying a fuzzy idea to
creating a polished PDF of your document. This process provides a
time-tested template that writers and marketing managers can use to
avoid all the common pitfalls in creating white papers. On the highest
level, this process includes three stages: planning, producing, and
promoting a white paper.

In the following sections, I give you an overview of these stages. Each
stage includes several specific steps: I cover planning a white paper in
Chapter 12, producing a white paper in Chapter 13, and then provide
dozens of promotional possibilities in Chapter 16.

[tip.eps] If you already have an in-house publishing process, compare it
to this one to make sure you cover all the same items. Pay special
attention to the planning and promoting stages, which include several
best practices that may be new to you. Merging these steps with your
existing procedures can create an even more robust process that gives
your white papers a competitive edge.

[tip.eps] If you already have a white paper underway, you can still
benefit from this process. You can easily pinpoint what stage you’re in
at the moment, and then you can steer the project along by suggesting
what the next steps should be. And pay attention to the recommended best
practices and warnings about common pitfalls at every step. If you’ve
skipped over any critical steps, circle back and complete them.

Stage 1: Planning a white paper

Time management experts say that every minute you spend planning saves
ten minutes of doing. With white papers, that ratio is even higher, so
that every minute you spend planning saves an hour of doing. That’s why
the first stage of any white paper must be devoted to planning.

In this all-important stage, the marketing manager clarifies the ideas
for the white paper, outlines the project’s terms of reference, and
rounds up all the required subject matter experts (SMEs) and reviewers.
They engage an appropriate writer and designer, either on contract or
in-house, and negotiate the terms of the engagement. Then the writer
begins work, doing a deep dive into the topic for research and then
drafting an executive summary (outline) to circulate for review and
approval.

At the end of this stage, the marketing manager has engaged all the
people required for the project, put a firm budget and schedule in
place, and approved an outline for the white paper. This first stage
dramatically increases the odds of producing an effective white paper
with a minimum of stress, miscommunication, and wasted effort. For more
details and a step-by-step description of how to plan a white paper, see
Chapter 12.

Stage 2: Producing a white paper

In this stage, the white paper moves from an approved outline to a
finished document. This stage includes writing drafts, seeking comments,
incorporating comments, creating graphics, sending the text for design,
and proofing finished pages. Most writers and marketing people
understand these steps.

My process also includes some recommended best practices that may be new
to you. For example, the writer should compile an organized bundle of
sources that the client can spot-check or file away for future
reference. The marketing manager should attend to any required payments,
permissions, and approvals. And the designer should insert the approved
metadata and keywords into the final PDF.

Most people see Stage 2 as the “creative” stage, not realizing that
planning and promotion are just as creative. Although the marketing team
and reviewers may be tempted to get deeply involved in the text,
graphics, or design of the document, they can make a more valuable
contribution by sticking to a higher level, helping shape the ideas and
refine the logic of the document. At the end of this stage, the client
has a finished PDF ready to publish and all the loose ends neatly tied
up. For more details and a step-by-step description of how to produce a
white paper, see Chapter 13.

Stage 3: Promoting a white paper

No matter how wonderful a white paper may be, if the intended readers
never find it, it won’t succeed. In this stage, your marketing team
swings into action to do everything possible to get the finished white
paper into the hands of the target audience. For more details and more
than 30 possible ways to promote a white paper, see Chapter 16.

Getting an Edge with Six Success Factors

Many white papers are started, but not all are finished, for many
reasons — priorities change, new products emerge, people come and go,
executives lose interest. Explaining a product in detail can turn up
flaws that nobody wants to admit or conflicting opinions that can’t be
resolved. How can you dodge these potential problems?

A good strategy is to understand the critical factors that can make
developing a white paper a smooth and agreeable process. Then try to get
as many of these factors working in your favor as possible. In the
following sections, I list six critical success factors for white
papers.

Success factor #1: In-house sponsor

The first cornerstone of success is an effective in-house sponsor who
can help the writer navigate through any company politics or difficult
personalities. For example, a sponsor can help resolve comments and tell
the writer which ones must be incorporated and which can be safely
ignored. (See the “Taming Four Maddening Pests” section, later in this
chapter, or head to Chapter 12 for more details about handling reviewers
and their comments.)

[remember.eps] A major reason behind most project failures is the lack
of management support. An in-house sponsor can remind everyone of the
company’s commitment to the white paper. If you’re the marketing manager
who commissioned the white paper, you can serve as this sponsor. If you
have a higher-up to champion the project, so much the better.

Success factor #2: Firm deadline

Treating a white paper as an open-ended project that you can finish
whenever you get around to it isn’t the best approach. To succeed, you
need an immovable deadline in the real world, such as a trade show. A
product release can provide a good deadline, as long as the hall is
already booked and the press release already delivered so the date can’t
possibly slip. Some marketing teams operate with quarterly plans so that
as the end of the quarter looms, everyone doubles down on their efforts
to get things finished. Another term for this immovable deadline is a
time box — a finite period after which a project absolutely, positively
must be delivered. If you don’t have a time box, try to create one.

[remember.eps] Publishing any type of content takes a big push to attend
to all the details, do all the necessary checking and rechecking, and
get a piece finalized, approved, and out the door. A white paper is one
of the most challenging pieces of content, so it takes an even bigger
push to complete one. Without a firm deadline that no one can push back
— a time box — your team can be distracted by other short-term
activities and tempted to put off the white paper until tomorrow.

Success factor #3: Deep understanding of the topic

A white paper has a better chance of success if you can find a writer
with a deep understanding of the problems being discussed; your target
audience; your new, improved solution; and your company. His familiarity
with the topic and the players at hand saves everyone time. After all,
very few experts enjoy explaining basic concepts that the writer should
already know. They’re more interested in discussing advanced issues,
such as design trade-offs, unexpected use cases, changes in the market
space, and other nuanced topics. A writer who can engage his interview
subjects on a higher level can pull out more interesting material for
the white paper.

[tip.eps] Ideally, you want to find a writer with two key
qualifications. First, make sure he’s well seasoned at writing white
papers. If he’s written any fewer than ten in recent years, he’s still a
beginner. Second, confirm that he has a good deal of domain knowledge
about your industry so he won’t waste your team’s time on introductory
topics.

[warning_bomb.eps] Many people say there’s no such thing as a dumb
question. I disagree. Strongly. This adage may apply to the classroom
but not to a white paper. When it comes to interviewing a top executive
or subject matter expert, here are three types of dumb questions:

[check.png] Dumb Question #1: “So how does your software work?” or some
other impossibly broad and unfocused query. Instead, do your homework
and ask something more specific.

[check.png] Dumb Question #2: “When was the company founded?” or some
other banal inquiry. Instead of wasting an expert’s time with such
trivial details, find the answer on the company’s website. The web is a
vast repository of knowledge; every writer should use it to prepare
fully for interviews and not waste time on basic facts or irrelevant
side issues.

[check.png] Dumb Question #3: “Here’s what I think.” This isn’t a
question but a statement intended to show off your own knowledge. Some
writers talk right over their subjects, cutting them off and missing
what they’re saying. Avoid that type of grandstanding. You’re there to
listen, not to talk.

Success factor #4: Cooperative SMEs and reviewers

Speaking of experts, a successful white paper often depends on ready
access to subject matter experts (SMEs) who make themselves available to
the white paper writer on request. Your writer likely needs to interview
them for an hour or two and e-mail them follow-up questions on the fly.
The same experts often serve as reviewers, so you need them to comment
on drafts in a reasonable time frame. The white paper sponsor needs to
round up the right in-house experts, make sure they stay involved, and
make sure they do what you need them to do — even if that takes a little
tactful nagging.

[warning_bomb.eps] Being “busy” or “on the road” aren’t legitimate
excuses. After all, everyone’s busy, and many people travel routinely.
Yet anyone traveling on business has a phone, a hotel room, and lots of
time waiting in airports or sitting on trains. Insist that your SMEs use
a few minutes of that time to answer e-mails or review drafts of the
white paper. You don’t want to leave your writer hanging for days for a
quick answer to some technical question.

Success factor #5: Joint ownership

This factor can be challenging to develop. Everyone on the project — the
marketing manager, product manager, engineers, SMEs, reviewers, writer,
and designer — should assume joint ownership of the white paper. They
must work together smoothly as a team, discuss differences openly, and
settle any disagreements quickly. Of course, this collaboration isn’t
always within your control.

[tip.eps] You can do something to help develop joint ownership of a
project. As I discuss in Chapter 12, I highly recommend holding an
initial kickoff call. This conference call helps get everyone on the
same page and makes sure everyone buys into the project and feels some
ownership for it. That camaraderie can carry a white paper through any
challenges that arise during the process.

Success factor #6: Sense of urgency

The final success factor is a shared sense of urgency among everyone
working on the project. People must consider the white paper significant
enough to make time for it in their busy schedules and to open e-mails
about it before any of the dozens of other e-mails clamoring for their
attention. This factor ties in with the firm deadline and sense of
ownership.

But as you know, it’s one thing to set a deadline, or a series of
deadlines for each step of the process; it’s another to get busy
executives and technical people to respect those deadlines and do what
they’re supposed to do in the time you’ve given them. Without some
measure of urgency, a white paper can get shoved to the back burner,
where it can languish for — well, forever.

Taming Four Maddening Pests

Four types of vermin infest the halls of many companies, ready to devour
your white paper without any warning. Any one can be enough to ravage
your document. This section shows you how to identify each type of
varmint and how to deal with it if it threatens your white paper.

This light-hearted look at these white paper critters has a serious
point. An effective content development process can help you tame these
creatures and produce a white paper that gets results. You must develop
a workable process that protects your white papers against these pests.

The scope-creep

This annoying little fellow refuses to stay on topic. He’s always
flitting about, suggesting side issues, sending you irrelevant material.
He delights in urging your white paper to cover more, more, more! “Why
stick to one issue,” he chirps, “when you could skim the surface of
six?” With a scope-creep as a reviewer, your white paper may become a
never-ending story.

[tip.eps] To tame a scope-creep, make sure to deliver an outline early.
Identify your ideal audience, preferred page count, and overall scope.
Get your manager and reviewers to approve this direction. Then, if a
scope-creep rears his pointy head, don’t say anything like, “That’s a
scope change,” or “That will cost extra.” He doesn’t care. It’s not his
schedule or his budget. Instead, politely ask, “Does our target audience
really need to know that? If so, we’ll have to change the outline.” If
all your other reviewers feel this change is pointless, rally them to
overrule the scope-creep. If this situation happens often enough, he’ll
soon be darting away to another project that’s easier to disrupt.

The tug-o-warrior

This willful strongman is always up for a contest. He may be from sales,
marketing, engineering, finance, or legal. Wherever he works, he wants
everyone to see things his way. He’ll argue with anyone, anywhere, and
never give an inch. His call of the wild sounds like this: “I’m right,
you’re wrong, and this is not a democracy.” With a tug-o-warrior as a
reviewer, your white paper may fall into permanent limbo, because this
creature will never agree with anyone on much of anything.

[tip.eps] To tame a tug-o-warrior when you’re a contractor, get half the
money upfront so the company is committed to finish the project. If
you’re on staff, peg your white paper to a real-world event, like a
trade show or a product release. That time box will give your project
more urgency and help you join forces with higher management to
out-muscle a tug-o-warrior. If you’re locked in a push-and-pull battle
where no one is budging, clearly articulate the different positions and
then hold a showdown meeting or phone call to resolve them. If enough
reviewers all pull together, they can topple a tug-o-warrior.

The no-see-em reviewer

You don’t often see this pest in the light of day. No one knows when
he’ll come swooping down out of the night, clutching your white paper in
his talons and shredding it to bits. Of course, he hasn’t bothered to
make a peep until then. Why should he waste his time giving you his
views early on? He much prefers the thrill of the kill. If he sits
anywhere high enough in the company to overrule your sponsor, this
winged menace can be quite deadly.

[tip.eps] To tame a no-see-em, identify all your reviewers early.
Ideally, pull them all together for a kickoff call. Have everyone sign
off on the outline. If a no-see-em still ambushes you, appeal to your
team of reviewers and sponsor. Remind the no-see-em that everyone but
him was involved from the start and agreed on the current direction.
Tell him his changes are going to cost extra money and eat up more time.
But sometimes, you just can’t win with a no-see-em, and he’ll pounce on
your white paper and not let go. It’s not your fault. Sometimes a white
paper is just in the wrong place at the wrong time, and it gets
attacked.

The dyslexic designer

This harmless-looking rodent can undermine a white paper after everyone
else’s work is done. A dyslexic designer loves to bury things, and he’ll
be happy to dig a hole for your white paper. He loves light gray letters
at a tiny point size. His specialty is dropping your text into a deep
gray well where no one ever sees it again.

[tip.eps] To tame a dyslexic designer, brief him early about the unique
format of a white paper. Get him thinking about how an annual report or
magazine article looks. Tell him about the target audience, especially
if they’re executives in their 40s or 50s whose eyes have changed so
they can no longer resolve tiny letters set in gray rather than black.
Stress how the words must be inviting and easy to read for someone
thinking about spending a lot of money with your company. Make sure the
white paper sponsor gets final approval on the design. If the company
has a corporate template unsuitable for a white paper, get an okay to
modify it. When a dyslexic designer realizes that someone is actually
looking at his work, he may stir his creative juices and produce
something attractive.

OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 12

Planning an Effective White Paper

In This Chapter

[arrow] Gathering an effective team

[arrow] Getting everyone on the same page

[arrow] Drawing up a detailed plan

[arrow] Researching the topic in depth

[arrow] Outlining the white paper content

Think about other professions. Does a surgeon go into the operating room
without reviewing the patient’s charts and having a clear idea of the
reason for the operation? Does a professional golfer tee up his first
drive in a tournament without playing a preliminary round on the course
to study each hole? Does a builder just start hammering without taking a
long look at the blueprints for the house he’s supposed to build?

If planning is important in every other field, isn’t it just as
important in creating a white paper? The correct answer is, yes,
planning is vitally important for a white paper, too. And the more
complex the project, the more important it is to have a solid plan.

Creating a white paper is certainly one of the most ambitious projects
in content marketing. The final document is likely ten pages long,
containing the most powerful highlights of a certain product (a
backgrounder), the most provocative statements on a certain issue (a
numbered list), or the best thinking on how to solve a certain problem
(a problem/solution). Creating an engaging long-form document to cover
that material is usually a huge challenge.

In this chapter, I describe the all-important first phase of the white
paper development process: planning. In this phase, a white paper
evolves from a foggy notion into a detailed outline approved by all
reviewers. This chapter covers the first five steps of this process:
assembling the team to work on the white paper — hiring an outside
writer, illustrator, and designer if needed — and then getting everyone
on the same page about the project, outlining the terms of reference for
the document, doing deep research into the topic, and creating and
approving a brief summary of the white paper’s content. These steps
include several magic bullets that can help you avoid pitfalls, prevent
a lot of stress, and save many hours that could otherwise be wasted.

Step 1: Assembling the Team

A white paper team includes as few as two people — the client and the
writer — and as many as a dozen, if many subject matter experts and
reviewers are involved. Choosing the correct people for the team
increases the chances of producing a successful white paper.

As the main players, the client and the writer must make sure the
relationship works. If either person has a sense that working together
may be difficult, that person should express those concerns and decline
to work together. Table 12-1 outlines what happens in this step and
who’s responsible for each part. The following sections explain how to
pull together a team and make sure the writer and client are on the same
page.

Table 12-1 What Happens in Step 1

  Step   Who                                 What
  ------ ----------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  1.1    Client                              Identifies need for white paper
  1.2    Client                              Identifies in-house subject matter experts and reviewers
  1.3    Client                              Picks writer, either outsourced or in-house
  1.4    Client                              Picks illustrator (if any), either outsourced or in-house
  1.5    Client                              Picks designer (if any), either outsourced or in-house
  1.6    Client and writer                   Negotiate project terms: scope, deadline, deliverables, fees (if outsourced)
  1.7    Client and illustrator (if any)     Negotiate project terms
  1.8    Client and designer (if any)        Negotiate project terms
  1.9    Writer, designer, and illustrator   Sign nondisclosure agreement (if outsourced)
  1.10   Client                              Pays initial deposit to writer (if outsourced)

What the client does in this step

As shown in Table 12-1, in Step 1, the client assembles the whole team
to work on the white paper. This team includes in-house subject matter
experts, the writer, and, if required, the illustrator and designer. On
some white papers, the writer fills all these roles, creating graphics
and doing page design as well. On others, separate professionals handle
each role. The client also identifies anyone else who should review the
white paper before it’s released, such as management higher-ups.

[remember.eps] The client is responsible for putting together the white
paper team in a thoughtful way, making sure not to add too many or too
few people or anyone who’s likely to swoop in at the last moment with
disruptive views. A lack of time, focus, or clarity at the outset can
lead to misunderstandings that undermine the project from start to
finish.

In this step, the client also negotiates the white paper scope and
deadlines with the writer, illustrator, and designer. If any of these
roles are contracted from outside the company (outsourced), the client
needs to negotiate fees. And any outside suppliers probably need to sign
a nondisclosure agreement (NDA) to promise they won’t blab about
anything they learn on the project to the client’s competitors or the
media.

[tip.eps] When hiring a writer (or any other outside contributors), be
clear about your expectations, deadlines, and any other details that
could lead to misunderstandings later in the project. You don’t want
either party to make unspoken assumptions about the project, deadline,
scope, payment, or terms that come back to haunt you. Deciding not to
work with a certain writer early on is better than finding out through
painful experience that he can’t deliver what you want. For tips on what
to look for when hiring a writer, see the later section “How to hire a
white paper writer.”

Most white paper writers ask for an initial deposit before starting a
project. That’s only natural. These projects involve several weeks’
work, and no independent writer can afford to gamble on not getting paid
for all that time. (For notes on typical white paper fees and schedules,
see Chapter 4.) That means if you’re hiring an independent writer, you
most likely need to get a PO (purchase order) or a deposit check ready
for that writer. Because illustrators and designers normally put in just
a few hours’ work, they’re most often content to submit an invoice to
the client after they finish work on a white paper.

What the writer does in this step

As shown in Table 12-1, in Step 1, the writer needs to win the project
from the client, perhaps against a small field of other candidates. This
means that the writer needs to impress the client with his writing
experience, domain knowledge, understanding of white papers, and
availability to meet the deadline. Check out other characteristics
clients may look for in a writer in the next section, “How to hire a
white paper writer.” An independent writer also needs to negotiate the
fee, invoice for an initial deposit, and perhaps sign a nondisclosure
agreement (NDA). (For notes on typical white paper fees and schedules,
see Chapter 4.)

[tip.eps] When you’re talking to a client about a proposed white paper,
make sure to get as many details as you can about the project scope,
deadline, and budget. Knowing these things gives you a better idea
whether the job is a good fit for you. Turning down a job at the outset
is better than trying to do the impossible or working with a client you
can never satisfy.

[tip.eps] Writers, when working with a new client, ask for a 50 percent
deposit upfront. Demanding a payment upfront isn’t always “nice” or
“convenient,” but doing so effectively protects you from wasting your
time on projects that don’t have management support. Companies sometimes
go out of business, the funding for a startup doesn’t come through, or
the client leaves the company with a white paper not finished. In those
cases, at least you have the first half of your fee as an effective kill
fee, and you can work on collecting more.

You can allow one exception to the rule about getting an initial
deposit. For a huge name-brand client, such as Google, getting a PO may
be enough to start work. After all, Google certainly has the money in
the bank, and in my experience, the company pays like clockwork: 30 days
after they get an invoice, they send out a wire transfer. So writing for
a client like that isn’t much of a risk.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Easing the terms of a nondisclosure agreement

I recently got an NDA from a client after receiving the initial deposit
and starting on the white paper. I was startled to see an unusual
noncompete clause, saying that for three years, I wouldn’t work with any
company that may compete with the client in an extremely broad market
space defined as internet-based publishing. The NDA had a list of
competing companies attached. But several of those companies were
already my clients, and several more were prospects I was targeting in
the near future!

I told the client I couldn’t sign that NDA and that all my other clients
for many years had trusted that I would keep the details of their
technology and their company confidential. A few days later, that client
sent me a new version of the NDA with the offending clause deleted.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Polishing a failed draft

Suppose you try to write a white paper in-house, but no one is satisfied
by the results. You give up and realize you need a professional writer
to finish the document. That’s fine, but don’t expect to tell any
writer, “We already started the white paper, so we only need you to
polish up our draft. And we’d like a discount because the work is
already half done.” When writers hear this, most will tell you that they
don’t do revisions.

Here’s why. Suppose your car breaks down, and you try to fix it. You
think you know the problem, but you don’t have the tools or the parts to
finish the repair. So you get your car towed to a garage, where you tell
the mechanic, “I know what the problem is, only I don’t have the right
tools or spare parts. So I brought it to you, but because I got it half
fixed, I want to pay only half your normal rate.”

How do you think any mechanic will react? He still has to use his years
of training and experience, troubleshoot the problem, use his special
tools, and find the right spare parts. When he gets your car fixed and
back on the road, do you really expect him to give you a 50 percent
discount? For what, exactly?

It’s the same thing with a failed white paper. In my experience — and
I’ve tried this enough times to know better — fixing someone else’s
unsuccessful draft takes almost as long, or longer, than starting a
white paper from scratch. The writer still has to do a proper plan, pick
the best flavor, dig up some more research, build a persuasive argument,
and write a compelling document. When a writer does all that to get a
white paper ready to go, do you really expect him to give you a
discount? For what, exactly?

Let’s be fair to both the mechanic and the writer. Admit it: Your failed
attempt to fix your own car — or write your own white paper — doesn’t
entitle you to a discount from a trained professional who can get your
project moving again. Do everyone a favor: Don’t even ask.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

How to hire a white paper writer

If you’re a client looking for an outside white paper writer, how do you
find the best one for you? And how do you go about hiring that person?

Before you rush off to Google “white paper writer,” you can zero in on
the best writer for your project by considering these four trade-offs:

[check.png] Money versus time: The more experienced the writer, the
faster he works, but the more he tends to charge. Do you prefer to save
money with a less-experienced writer who may work slower, make mistakes,
and eat up more of your time? Or can you afford a seasoned pro who works
efficiently, hits the bull’s-eye on the first try, and creates a more
polished document?

[check.png] Writing experience versus domain knowledge: Do you prefer a
writer with a lot of experience writing white papers or someone who
knows your industry inside out? Sometimes you can find both, but that
combo will likely cost extra. Given the choice, most clients lean toward
writing ability. After all, becoming a smooth, persuasive writer takes
years, but any good researcher can learn the basics of any industry in a
couple of weeks, especially with you to guide them.

[check.png] Full-service versus text-only: You may want to find a
creative supplier who can deliver a turnkey package with text, graphics,
page design, and a final PDF all ready to publish. You may also want the
writer to generate related marketing materials, such as a press release,
several blog posts, a couple dozen tweets, and so on, to help promote
the white paper. Or you may be happy to have the writer deliver an
unadorned Word file that you can send to your designer while your
marketing team rolls out the promotions.

[check.png] Project manager versus wordsmith: If you’re working on your
first white paper, you may want a seasoned writer who can create a plan,
take the lead during conference calls, and serve as the de facto project
manager, spelling out where you are and what to do next. If you’ve
already published many white papers, you can likely manage the project
yourself, so you just need a writer to put together the content.

[tip.eps] If you’re the client looking to hire a white paper writer,
figure out where you stand on each of these trade-offs and decide what
services you need before you approach writers, because they’ll ask. For
example, here are three possible scenarios:

[check.png] If budget is a concern and you have an in-house writer and
designer, enlist them for your white paper. If none of you have
published a white paper before, use this book to help guide the process.
You may have to wait to get your project on their schedule, and you
should plan to promote the white paper yourself, but the price will be
right: nothing beyond the same salaries everyone normally draws.

[check.png] If budget is limited but you have no in-house resources,
look for a medium-level writer who has done at least ten white papers in
your market space so he brings strong domain knowledge to the table.
Plan to run his drafts through a good editor to finesse the text. Find
an affordable designer-illustrator, and plan to do your own marketing.

[check.png] If you have the budget, hire the best suppliers you can
find. Seasoned creatives will save everyone time, give you what you want
the first time, and surprise you with innovative suggestions and best
practices.

[tip.eps] If you’re the writer talking to a client about a project, know
where you fit. Ask yourself where you come down on each of the
trade-offs. Then describe your experience, services, and fees honestly
to prospective clients.

For example, I tell prospects that my fees are near the top of the
scale, which I can justify with my experience on close to 200 white
papers. I explain that no one can touch my versatile background as a
journalist, technical writer, marketing executive, and copywriter. And I
assure them that my team can provide all the services they need, from
planning to brainstorming promotions. If they see the value I can
deliver, they hire me. If not, they move on to someone else.

Step 2: Holding a Kickoff Conference Call

Step 2 is one of the magic bullets in a successful white paper project.
This step can save weeks of stress, communication breakdowns, wasted
effort, scrap, and rework. Holding a kickoff conference call creates
shared expectations among everyone on the project, promotes harmony on a
team, and dramatically reduces one of the most common problems writers
report: changes in direction partway through a white paper.

Several significant things happen during this step:

[check.png] The client confirms the availability of all reviewers; this
reduces the chance of someone being absent for much of the process but
emerging at the end with different views.

[check.png] The whole team reviews all the key parameters of the white
paper, including the audience, purpose, call to action, scope, and
title; this begins to create a shared vision of the project.

[check.png] The client and writer gather the best thinking from the
whole team, not just one person. Pooling everyone’s knowledge and
experience can help create a more effective white paper more quickly.

[check.png] The team uncovers any differences of opinion early, when
they are much easier to deal with; this reduces the chance of anyone
naysaying the white paper drafts later on.

[remember.eps] This step lays a solid direction for a successful
project. Gathering everyone together to visualize the ultimate white
paper follows one of the so-called seven habits of highly effective
people: “Begin with the end in mind.” And giving everyone a chance to
have his say at the start eliminates any surprises and second-guessing
that can drive a project off a cliff later.

The client and writer can schedule the kickoff call for any time that
makes sense. In fact, the client often schedules the kickoff call as
soon as he commits to paying the deposit. Getting a check from
accounting always takes a few days, as does delivering that check to the
writer. The writer must decide whether he wants to hold the call without
having the deposit in his hands. Some writers are easygoing when they
know a check is coming; others won’t even schedule a phone call until
they have the payment in their hands or see that it has cleared the
bank.

Table 12-2 shows the who and what of this step, and the following
sections go into detail about each of these tasks.

Table 12-2 What Happens in Step 2

  Step   Who                 What
  ------ ------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------
  2.1    Client              Starts making notes on the white paper
  2.2    Client              Schedules conference call with writer and all reviewers
  2.3    All                 Hold conference call with all reviewers
  2.4    Client and writer   Resolve any differences during conference call
  2.5    Client and writer   Keep notes during call and compare notes afterward

What the client does in this step

As shown in Table 12-2, in Step 2, the client thinks about the scope of
the white paper, including the purpose, audience, flavor, call to
action, keywords, and so on. Then the client schedules a conference call
with the writer and reviewers to discuss and confirm these details.
Having all the reviewers on the line enables the client to make sure
everyone is on the same page and helps develop a shared understanding of
the project that every reviewer agrees with. This call generally takes
about an hour.

If any differences of opinion surface during the call, the client
tactfully probes to give those areas a proper airing and resolves them
to everyone’s satisfaction. Then the client gives everyone a final
chance to raise any concerns when the white paper plan is circulated for
comments during Step 3.

Both the client and the writer keep careful notes during the call. The
client, the writer, or both often record the call in case they need to
re-listen to any parts later.

[remember.eps] Holding a kickoff conference call helps prevent the
painful experience of having a no-see-em reviewer descend from on high
to shred your white paper late in the process, without being involved
any earlier. For more on the destructive capabilities of the no-see-em
pest, see Chapter 11.

What the writer does in this step

As shown in Table 12-2, in Step 2, the writer participates in the
conference call with all the reviewers, helping to discuss and resolve
any differences (see the next section). The writer takes notes during
the call and then compares those notes with the client to confirm their
impressions. The writer uses these notes to complete the white paper
plan in Step 3.

Resolving differences during the conference call

Either the client or the writer can lead the phone call. If any
differences of opinion emerge during the conference call, the best
practice is to explore these differences thoroughly to let everyone have
their say. Developing a shared consensus is better than letting one
person pull rank and overrule everyone else. After all, if one person is
just going to make unilateral decisions, what’s the point of the
conference call in the first place? Instead, keep talking and try to get
everyone to pick the most sensible alternative.

For example, the VP of Sales may say that the purpose of the white paper
is to generate leads at the top of the sales funnel. But the product
manager wants the paper to highlight the competitive advantages of the
product and help cement sales at the bottom of the funnel. In other
words, they’re each proposing to address a target audience at a
different point in the sales cycle, which are such vastly different
goals that they may require two different flavors of white paper (see
Part II for details on the different flavors). The team on the
conference call must understand this distinction and pick one or the
other flavor or else decide to do two different white papers, one for
each audience.

[warning_bomb.eps] The writer must never start writing until any serious
differences uncovered during Step 2 have been resolved. Resolving these
issues may take some internal discussions at the client side; or it may
require another conference call to deal specifically with those
differences.

In rare instances, the differences between reviewers are so fundamental
that they can’t be resolved; the gap is too big to be bridged. I’ve
heard of this happening, for example, between the engineering and
marketing people at a company. In such a rare case, the client and the
writer must figure out what to do next. Here are some possible options:

[check.png] If only one person has a dissenting view, drop that person
from the reviewing team and proceed without him, if at all possible.

[check.png] If the reviewers are split into opposing camps, escalate the
issue to a higher executive who can make the decision on which way to
proceed.

[check.png] If no higher executive is present, or the project is
hopelessly deadlocked, simply cancel the white paper. If you hired a
contract writer, you can expect him to keep the initial deposit as a 50
percent kill fee, which is standard in the industry.

Step 3: Preparing a Plan

When clients hire an advertising agency to do a campaign, the client
often prepares a creative brief, which spells out many details to
incorporate in that campaign, such as the purpose, audience, main
take-aways, key competitive advantages, and any standard corporate
messages, color palettes, logos, and the like. A creative brief comes
closer than anything else to a white paper plan and is essentially a
document that spells out the terms of reference for this kind of content
marketing project.

Unfortunately, most companies never prepare any white paper plans, and
their white papers suffer from this omission. Many teams are so rushed
to get their white paper finished that they don’t start it properly.

In this step, the writer drafts a plan for the rest of the team to
review. If any reviewers have comments, the writer updates the plan to
reflect those comments until the client, all the reviewers, and the
writer are completely satisfied with the plan. Table 12-3 shows an
outline of the tasks and people involved in this step, and the following
sections provide more details on the writer’s and client’s
responsibilities and what goes into a white paper plan.

Table 12-3 What Happens in Step 3

  ------ ----------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Step   Who         What
  3.1    Writer      Creates draft white paper plan
  3.2    Writer      Sends draft white paper plan to client
  3.3    Client      Circulates draft white paper plan to all reviewers with deadline for comments
  3.4    Reviewers   Comment on white paper plan
  3.5    Client      Gathers all comments and resolves any differences
  3.6    Writer      Refines white paper plan to incorporate comments
  3.7    All         Repeat steps 3.2 through 3.6 until all reviewers are satisfied with white paper plan
  ------ ----------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

What the writer does in this step

As shown in Table 12-3, in Step 3, the writer creates the white paper
plan, which sets out the terms of reference for the project, including
the purpose, audience, call to action, flavor, keywords, title,
high-level outline, and any other characteristics of the document (see
the “Putting together a white paper plan” section for a complete list).
The client circulates the draft plan to all reviewers for their comments
(see the next section), and then the writer refines it until all the
reviewers are satisfied. Drawing up this blueprint in advance puts the
whole project on solid ground and helps it to succeed.

What the client does in this step

As shown in Table 12-3, in Step 3, the client receives the draft white
paper plan from the writer and circulates it to all the reviewers, with
a fairly short deadline for getting their comments back, probably a week
or less. No matter how busy people are, they can usually look at a one-
or two-page plan for a few minutes. When the comments come back, the
client reviews them to make sure they make sense and gives the writer
some notion of how to deal with them. If some comments can be safely
ignored, the client tells the writer so.

Putting together a white paper plan

An effective white paper plan should include all the following items:

[check.png] The primary goal for the document

[check.png] The target audience, including demographics, psychographics,
and technographics, or a set of personas

[check.png] Where the audience sits in the sales funnel: at the top,
just starting their research; in the middle, comparing different
vendors; or at the bottom, close to making a purchase

[check.png] The call to action, or what you want the ideal readers to do
after they finish reading

[check.png] The ideal flavor: a backgrounder, numbered list,
problem/solution, or a mash-up between a numbered list and one of the
others (see Part II for details about the flavors)

[check.png] The target keywords, or the search terms you expect the
ideal readers will use to find the white paper

[check.png] Two or three possible titles, to be tweaked as you go

[check.png] An official list of reviewers

[check.png] A list of background material available from the client

[check.png] Likely sources for further research: articles, associations,
blogs, forums, industry analysts, LinkedIn groups, magazines, recorded
webinars, reports, reviews, slides decks, or websites

[check.png] A high-level overview of the recommended content

[check.png] The writing tool to prepare the text with, usually Microsoft
Word

[check.png] The design tool to design the pages with, usually Adobe
InDesign

[check.png] Recommended page design guidelines

[check.png] A realistic schedule for completing the project or else a
real-world deadline that must be met

Step 4: Gathering Research

No effective white paper can be written without research because every
white paper must be based on facts and logic, not fluff and hot air. In
this step, the client assembles all the helpful background he can easily
put his hands on and then passes it to the writer. The writer can expect
to do some research to support the document he’s writing, likely for
several days. The key for the writer is to do this research effectively
and to keep track of the results carefully so he can draw on it to back
up the assertions he makes when writing the white paper. See Table 12-4
and the following sections for the details of this step.

Table 12-4 What Happens in Step 4

  ------ -------- --------------------------------------------------
  Step   Who      What
  4.1    Client   Assembles background and good sources for writer
  4.2    Client   Sends background to writer
  4.3    Writer   Reviews background from client
  4.4    Writer   Does additional online research
  4.5    Writer   Interviews subject matter experts and executives
  4.6    Writer   Keeps careful track of all sources
  ------ -------- --------------------------------------------------

What the client does in this step

As shown in Table 12-4, in Step 4, the client assembles background
material and passes it to the writer, along with a list of likely
sources for further research. This material can include articles,
associations, blogs, forums, industry analysts, LinkedIn groups,
magazines, recorded webinars, reports, reviews, slide decks, or
websites.

What the writer does in this step

As shown in Table 12-4, in Step 4, the writer reviews all the background
material from the client and looks into all the proposed sources,
including articles, blog posts, forums, industry analysts, LinkedIn
groups, magazines, recorded webinars, reports, reviews, slide decks, or
websites. The writer also interviews subject matter experts and
executives from the company. Then the writer extracts the best proof
points, quotes, and statistics to use in the white paper, carefully
keeping track of all sources for later attribution (see Chapter 14 more
information about doing research and keeping track of sources).

Step 5: Preparing an Executive Summary

After doing the research, it’s time for the writer to dive in and start
drafting a six- or eight-page white paper, right? Wrong. Without a
direction blessed by the client, much of what the writer drafts could
end up discarded. Instead, the writer should provide a short deliverable
so the client and reviewers can confirm the proposed direction. This
deliverable is an outline or draft executive summary, usually no more
than one page long. Reading and commenting on such a brief summary takes
only a few minutes.

Submitting an executive summary for the client to review benefits the
project and people involved in several ways:

[check.png] The writer provides a relatively fast deliverable, showing
reviewers that the project is moving along quickly.

[check.png] The writer provides a short deliverable, enabling busy
reviewers to deal with a brief document that takes only a few minutes to
review.

[check.png] The writer doesn’t waste time writing a long document that
may have to be scrapped in whole or in part.

[check.png] The reviewers don’t waste time reviewing a long document
that may be somewhat off target.

This step dramatically reduces the risk of any misunderstandings and
rework later on. Consider this step another magic bullet that can
prevent a lot of stress and strain during the white paper project. In
fact, this step is so powerful that no writer or client should ever skip
it. Agreeing on a one-page summary of the ultimate white paper carries
the writer and client down the path toward a successful project.

Table 12-5 outlines what happens in this step and who’s responsible. The
following sections go into more detail, including how to put together an
executive summary and what to do with comments from reviewers.

Table 12-5 What Happens in Step 5

  ------ ----------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Step   Who         What
  5.1    Writer      Creates 1- or 2-page draft executive summary
  5.2    Writer      Sends draft executive summary to client
  5.3    Client      Circulates draft executive summary to all reviewers with deadline for comments
  5.4    Reviewers   Comment on executive summary
  5.5    Client      Gathers all comments and resolves any differences
  5.6    Writer      Refines executive summary to incorporate comments
  5.7    All         Repeat steps 5.2 through 5.6 until all reviewers are satisfied with executive summary
  ------ ----------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

What the writer does in this step

As shown in Table 12-5, in Step 5, the writer boils down all the
accumulated research into a one- or two-page summary with all the main
points of the white paper for the client to review. After the client
sends back all the reviewers’ comments, the writer refines the executive
summary, if needed, and this process continues until everyone is
satisfied.

This step takes a lot of effort from the writer, including the hardest
“thinking” part of the process. The good news is that after the writer
finishes the executive summary and gets it approved by the client, the
rest of the writing is relatively quick and easy, more like filling in
the blanks than doing such hard thinking.

[warning_bomb.eps] Not every writer works this way; some follow the
timeless motto, “How do I know what I think until I see what I said?” In
other words, some writers are used to figuring it out as they go along
or doing a discovery draft. All I can say is that you’re not writing a
piece of fiction built from flights of fancy; you’re writing a
persuasive piece of nonfiction built from facts and logic. If you try to
figure it out as you go along, you’ll undoubtedly have to do more drafts
and spend more time staring at the walls wondering where you’re going
than if you create a plan at the start.

What the client does in this step

As shown in Table 12-5, in Step 5, the client circulates the draft
executive summary to all the reviewers and then gathers all comments by
a set deadline. This deadline can be relatively short, no more than a
week, because the executive summary is generally just a single page.
Most people can take five minutes to read through one page, especially
when they were involved in the conference call that spelled out the
paper’s direction. No surprises should appear in the executive summary.
It should simply present a more developed skeleton based on the agreed
plan.

Crafting the executive summary

When writing the executive summary, you should use fairly finished
sentences. A list of bare bullet points does nothing to convey a flow of
ideas or showcase your command of the material. You can think of the
executive summary as a collection of topic sentences; each sentence can
be expanded into a paragraph or two in the final paper. Beyond summing
up the proposed direction of the white paper, you also want the draft
executive summary to reassure the team that you can craft research into
a persuasive story.

An executive summary can be done two different ways, as a trailer or a
synopsis:

[check.png] A trailer-style executive summary includes intriguing
highlights from the white paper, intended to entice prospective readers
into going through the full document.

[check.png] A synopsis-style executive summary includes the whole
argument of the white paper in condensed form. Have you seen those
executive summaries that boil down an entire 300-page business book into
just a few pages? That’s what you want to do with a synopsis. You don’t
have to include more than two or three quotes or factoids in your
summary, or maybe none at all, as long as you have all the sources you
need to make your points close at hand.

How do you choose which type of executive summary to use? Personally, I
prefer the synopsis, for several reasons. First, a synopsis gives a
complete recap of the argument without leaving any gaps. Second, you can
pop in a synopsis-style summary at the start of the final white paper,
so you get to repurpose it in the finished document.

On the other hand, a trailer-style summary plays peekaboo with the
content, without revealing the whole argument. This style assumes that
every reviewer and reader have the time and interest to read the full
document to get the entire story. This assumption is shaky. To stay on
more solid ground, I highly recommend using a synopsis-style summary.

Dealing with comments on the executive summary

Whether you’re a white paper client or a white paper writer, you have to
deal with comments from reviewers. If you pick your reviewers carefully,
most of their comments should be clear, constructive, and to the point.
But what about the comments that are hopelessly unclear, destructive, or
beside the point? How do you deal with those? The following sections
provide a few tips.

Don’t take it personally

First of all, don’t take the comments personally. Even if you’re dealing
with someone who you suspect has a personal grudge against you — which
is really quite rare — you can never be faulted for remaining calm and
professional.

Second, skip past those comments and move onto another reviewer’s
comments. After some time has passed, go back to the upsetting comments
and look at them again. Is there anything you missed the first time,
some actual nugget of insight wrapped in all that negativity? If so,
extract that and try to work with it.

Ignore nonsense reviewers, if you can

If you can’t find anything of any merit in some reviewer’s comments,
think about where that person sits in the company. Is that person your
boss’s boss? A highly placed VP? The owner’s son? Ask yourself: If we
ignore this person’s comments now, can he mess up the white paper later?
If so, for the sake of politics, you may have to engage with him,
perhaps just to let him blow off steam. The reviewer may just want
someone to listen to him pontificate for a while.

[warning_bomb.eps] Several pests can rear their heads during this step,
including the scope-creep and the tug-o-warrior. For notes on how to
deal with comments from these and other pests, see Chapter 11.

Give the writer some guidance

If you’re the client, you owe the writer some guidance on how to deal
with comments from certain reviewers. Otherwise, the writer can waste a
lot of time for nothing. The writer can implement certain suggestions
you don’t agree with or struggle to resolve contradictory comments from
different reviewers. For example, one reviewer suggests expanding a
certain section, while another says to shorten it. What do you do? The
more reviewers you invite into the process, the more contradictions can
happen, and the more guidance you may have to give the writer. Simply
take ten minutes to run through the comments on the phone with the
document open on both your screens. That ten minutes can save the writer
hours of frustration.

OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 13

Producing a Powerful White Paper

In This Chapter

[arrow] Leaving people to their proper roles

[arrow] Writing text and drawing graphics

[arrow] Getting comments on text and graphics

[arrow] Refining text and graphics to incorporate comments

[arrow] Managing sources

[arrow] Preparing the final white paper

[arrow] Finishing up the project

You can think of the three phases of this white paper process as plan,
produce, and promote. The middle phase is the producing part, where the
white paper goes from an approved outline to a completely finished
document, ready to post on the web or hand out as hard copy. (I cover
the planning stage in Chapter 12 and the promoting stage in Chapter 16.)

In this chapter, I describe Steps 6 through 12 of the white paper
process: creating the first-draft text and graphics; gathering comments;
refining the text and graphics into a second draft and gathering any
final comments; organizing all the sources referenced in the paper in
good order; and attending to any payments, permissions, and postmortem
to wrap up the project in a business-like way. (Check out Chapter 12 for
Steps 1 through 5.) Some of these steps are standard and predictable;
others are best practices I highly recommend, which may be new to many
clients or writers who don’t yet follow them.

Let the Writer Write!

To make a white paper happen, you need more than a writer. As Chapter 12
explains, many people can be involved in a white paper, from company
executives to marketing people to creative professionals like the
writer, illustrator, and designer. And here’s the danger: People in
other roles can be tempted to get too involved in a creative process
they know little about.

For example, marketing people can rewrite every paragraph in a draft
white paper to make it sound more like the advertising copy they
normally see. Engineers can redraw every graphic to make it look more
like the higgledy-piggledy sketches they use to explain technical issues
on a white board. Salespeople can insert calls to buy the product far
too early in the document, echoing their mantra of “always be closing.”
Although all these people have the right to make comments on the white
paper content, they don’t have the right to overstep their roles and
hijack the creative process.

If you’re the client who put together a good team with an experienced
writer, illustrator, and designer, you need to defend your team’s
efforts from any incursions by people in other roles who may feel the
need to be “creative.” Ideally, a white paper isn’t an exercise in
creativity; it’s a carefully planned business document designed to
achieve a desired result from a target audience. You need to defend the
white paper from anything or anyone who jeopardizes reaching that goal.

Don’t let team members or reviewers waste everyone’s time by trying to
out-create the creators. Let the writer write, the illustrator draw, and
the designer design. Let the reviewers make fair comments on those
efforts, and let your creative team refine their efforts accordingly.

[tip.eps] If you’re a white paper client from a marketing team, your
colleagues can make the best contribution at the start of the process
with the planning and at the end with the promotions. If you need to
distract them from this middle or creative stage, get them preparing the
promotional campaigns now. There’s plenty of room for creativity in
promoting a white paper, as described in Chapter 16.

In some companies, all marketing pieces are submitted to an in-house
editor to review for house style and clarity. Some freelance writers use
their own editors to smooth out any wrinkles in their style. For
simplicity’s sake, I left the editor’s role out of this chapter. If you
do use an editor, any draft from the writer can go through the editor’s
hands before or after going to the client in Steps 6 or 8, or the final
text can go through the editor before going to the designer in Step 11.

Step 6: Creating First-Draft Text and Graphics

The first step in producing a white paper is to create the first-draft
text and graphics. Writers, illustrators, designers, and business people
understand this step well. After planning the recipe and getting the
executive summary approved, you can put together all the ingredients to
create a delicious sundae.

This step groups together text and graphics instead of keeping them
separate or parallel processes. The visuals in a white paper are vital;
in some ways, they’re the most important part. Readers will certainly
remember an effective visual better than they remember any actual text
from a white paper. You can see what this step is all about in Table
13-1 and the following sections.

Table 13-1 What Happens in Step 6

  ------ ------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Step   Who           What
  6.1    Writer        Expands executive summary into draft white paper
  6.2    Writer        Creates all elements and inserts proof points
  6.3    Writer        Polishes text, with help from editor (if any)
  6.4    Writer        Sends first-draft white paper text to client
  6.5    Writer        Creates raw sketches (with help from subject matter experts) and sends them to illustrator
  6.6    Illustrator   Creates rough graphics and sends them to writer
  6.7    Writer        Reviews rough graphics and sends comments (if any) to illustrator
  6.8    Illustrator   Refines rough graphics to incorporate comments
  6.9    Illustrator   Sends first-draft graphics to writer and client
  ------ ------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

What the writer does in this step

As shown in Table 13-1, the writer does most of Step 6, with some help
from the illustrator (if any) and the editor (if any). The writer
expands the approved executive summary into a first-draft white paper,
drawing on the research he compiled in Step 4. Depending on which flavor
of white paper the client chose, the writer creates all the required
elements, including an introduction, the main body, a buyer’s guide, a
call to action, info about the company, and so on. The writer inserts
enough proof points to make a convincing case and keeps track of all
sources in an orderly way. The writer polishes the text through several
iterations — or uses the services of an editor — to make the text smooth
and persuasive before sending it to the client.

The writer (or subject matter expert, SME) is also responsible for
sketching and sending raw graphics to the illustrator (if any). These
sketches don’t need to be polished, but they should be clear and
complete enough to convey the intended message.

[tip.eps] As the writer, you may wonder how to start any graphics or
share them by e-mail. Well, you can draw raw sketches by hand and scan
them into files to e-mail, or you can work in your preferred graphic
program, such as PowerPoint, SmartDraw, or Visio, and e-mail those
files. After you get graphics from the illustrator, you can print those
out and write comments on the hard copies and then scan them back in. Or
if you have the right software, you can open the graphic files from the
illustrator, make comments right in them, and save them with meaningful
file names (see the nearby sidebar “Coherent file names for drafts”).

What the illustrator does in this step

As shown in Table 13-1, in Step 6, the illustrator creates preliminary
graphics and sends them back to the writer to review. The writer may
suggest some refinements so the process loops through Steps 6.6 and 6.7
once or twice before the illustrator sends the first-draft graphics to
the client.

Expanding the executive summary

If you’re the writer, how do you expand an executive summary into a full
white paper? One quick way to get started is to paste another copy of
the executive summary right after the first. Working in the second copy,
think of each sentence as the topic sentence for a paragraph, and work
at expanding it to a full paragraph or two. Add more thoughts to each
point, drawing on what you can easily remember from your research. If
you like to use mind maps, create one with the main ideas in the summary
as your starting point. You can even create a separate mind map for each
product feature, numbered point, or main section of your argument.

Jot down notes and sentence fragments as they come to mind. Don’t even
try to make complete sentences at this point, and don’t censor yourself
if you depart from the executive summary. You may come up with an
interesting sidebar, a new numbered point to add, or another link in
your argument that never occurred to anyone yet. Step 6 is the creative
stage, not the judging stage. Try to work quickly and intuitively,
relying on your summary for the skeleton while you flesh it out with
more details.

At a certain point, you’ll likely want to dip back into your research.
Work back and forth between the summary, your research, your mind map,
and your growing ideas any way you want. Later, you can worry about
using proper grammar, adding proof points that make every point in your
argument as convincing as possible, and making every section engaging
and compelling to read.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Coherent file names for drafts

If the client has a file-naming scheme he always uses, the writer should
find out what it is and use it. If not, here’s one possible scheme for
naming white paper drafts and any supporting files sent to the client:

[project name][draft][date][sender]

And here’s a sample file name that uses this scheme:

Big Data in 2013 wp draft-2 May-27-2013 GG

The specifics in this file name reveal four of the five w’s: what’s in
the file, where we are in the process, when this file was created, and
who created it. See how easily you can scan this file name and see what
it’s all about?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Creating graphics without an illustrator

A professional illustrator normally charges several hundred dollars per
graphic. Not every white paper team includes an illustrator, most often
because the client never considered allocating any budget for graphics.
In this case, the writer usually serves as the illustrator, perhaps
drawing on raw input from a SME or else coming up with graphic ideas by
himself.

If the budget allows absolutely no room for graphics, the writer can use
one of the options I describe in the following sections.

[warning_bomb.eps] You may think that the best way to stretch your
budget for graphics is to Google some phrase and then grab the best
image that pops up. Stop. Don’t even entertain another thought about
this option. Somebody made that image, and that person may not
appreciate that you grabbed it without his permission. Or he may have
grabbed it from the rightful owner and then reposted it without any
credit. But any stolen goods you steal from a thief are still stolen.
And getting a letter from the owner’s lawyer demanding cash can be
expensive — not to mention embarrassing. Using one of the next three
options is far less risky.

Using Creative Commons graphics

You may come across a graphic that’s been released for public use under
a Creative Commons license. These are graphics that the creator has
willingly shared with the world. But these licenses have different
provisions, and artists may not want private companies using their art
for commercial purposes. Read the provisions for that graphic carefully
to make sure using it in your white paper is permissible.

Creating business-quality graphics

You can make your own white paper graphics with PowerPoint, Visio, or
SmartDraw. PowerPoint and Visio are both well-known products from
Microsoft, where you can drag and drop shapes or add in pieces of clip
art. Most people already have PowerPoint on their PCs. The drawback of
both programs is that you must start with a blank screen and build
everything from scratch.

SmartDraw is less well known but well worth considering if you need
business graphics for white papers, slide decks, or blogs. This
cost-effective package aimed at non-artists comes bundled with scores of
predrawn graphics that are supremely easy to tweak. You can search for a
certain type of graphic, find one close to what you want, and then
tailor it by adjusting the color, adding your own text, and adding or
removing lines or boxes. In just a few minutes, anyone can create an
acceptable graphic with SmartDraw.

Finding stock photos

A good stock photo can really dress up the cover of a white paper and
visually suggest who the document is aimed at and what it's about. A
stock photo large enough for a white paper cover generally costs less
than $30 from a source like iStockphoto (www.istockphoto.com). You can
either pay that amount out of your white paper fee or pass it along to
the client. That small fee usually isn't a problem.

[tip.eps] When you buy a stock photo from iStockphoto — as long as you
buy the Standard license, not just Editorial — you can legally use it
multiple times. One useful way to stretch a budget for graphics is to
use portions of the same photo for different sections. In other words,
use the full photo on the white paper cover, and then use smaller
snippets sprinkled throughout the document for no extra fee.

Reviewing graphics

Graphics need reviewing, just like text does. The first set of graphics
from the illustrator isn’t always perfect. As the writer, your job is to
give the graphics a critical viewing and ask yourself whether they’re
clear and complete. Would a graphic work better if it was simplified,
clarified, enlarged, compressed, stretched, rotated, or flipped? Does it
read from left to right and from top to bottom to match the reading
conventions of our English-speaking culture? Can you remove any lines or
compress any callouts?

Make sure the illustrator understands that you reserve the right to do a
round or two of comments and refinements to make the graphics as
effective as possible. And then like any reviewer, be precise and
constructive.

[tip.eps] If, as the writer, you create any graphics, always have the
client, and ideally the appropriate SME(s), review them to make sure
they’re accurate. Draw the graphics up as clearly as you can and
circulate them for comments before you send them to the illustrator to
be professionally redrawn. Otherwise, you’re gambling that the first
effort from the illustrator won’t need any radical revisions, which eats
up time and money.

Step 7: Gathering Initial Comments

This step is a well-understood part of any publishing process. Table
13-2 and the following sections show what happens and who’s involved in
this step. After the writer creates a first draft and the illustrator
creates the graphics, the reviewers need to look at them and comment.
And the client has to manage the reviews to make sure they happen in a
timely and constructive way. Of course, this whole process must be
handled with patience, tact, and sometimes a dash of good-natured humor
from everyone.

Table 13-2 What Happens in Step 7

  ------ ----------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Step   Who         What
  7.1    Client      Circulates first-draft text and graphics to reviewers with deadline for comments
  7.2    Reviewers   Comment on first-draft text and graphics
  7.3    Client      Gathers all comments and resolves any differences
  7.4    Client      Sends comments on text to writer
  7.5    Client      Sends comments on graphics to illustrator
  ------ ----------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

What the client does in this step

As shown in Table 13-2, in Step 7, the client circulates the first-draft
text and graphics to all reviewers with a request to get their comments
back by the appointed deadline. To set the deadline, the client checks
the schedule and gives a realistic review period.

[tip.eps] A week is about right for a first-draft white paper; never
allow more than two weeks, or the project can lose momentum with team
members.

[tip.eps] Help your reviewers understand that you value their time and
will consider each of their comments carefully, but they should keep the
ideal reader and purpose of the document in mind rather than their
personal preferences, like putting two spaces after every period or
using their favorite buzzwords. As they go through a draft, every
reviewer should ask, “How will the ideal reader react to this? How well
will this help us achieve our purpose?” rather than “Doesn’t this
sentence break the rules I learned from Mrs. Thomas in fourth grade?”

As the comments come in, the client reviews them to make sure they make
sense and don’t contradict one another. The client clarifies any
comments that are unclear, contradictory, or destructive, or else
discards them outright. Finally, the client sends all useful comments on
the text to the writer and all useful comments on the graphics to the
illustrator.

Dealing with comments on the first draft

Very few reviewers understand the different levels of editing; many feel
that their role is to work at the worm’s-eye view of the text simply to
check the spelling and grammar of the draft. Because Word can check
spelling and grammar fairly well, tell your reviewers that you want them
to focus on the bird’s-eye view to make sure the white paper makes valid
points and fulfills the desired purpose. Even so, you can expect most of
the comments to focus on individual words, phrases, and sentences. Some
reviewers mark any sentence that starts with and or but as a big no-no
or suggest that you insert two spaces after each period. The good news
is that these rules drummed into people’s heads in grade school aren’t
absolute. The bad news is that these sticklers may be powerful
executives in the company who insist on reviewing for this kind of banal
detail.

[remember.eps] An ideal reviewer sticks to the higher level, correcting
technical details, shading the text to reflect company or product
positioning, and perhaps suggesting more or less coverage of some
particular area. If you find a reviewer who consistently provides this
kind of useful, to-the-point comments, include him in all your future
white paper projects.

You shouldn’t see any sweeping comments suggesting that you make a big
departure from the approved outline or include any new material that
clearly doesn’t belong to a white paper of the chosen flavor. If you
find a reviewer who consistently suggests that you expand the content in
all different directions, or go into many side issues, he may be a
scope-creep. In this case, see Chapter 11 for how to deal with this
pest.

Step 8: Creating the Second-Draft White Paper

When all the reviews come in — just like for a Broadway show — the
writer can see whether the white paper is a hit or a miss. But unlike an
expensive musical, the writer has another chance to make it good by
incorporating comments from reviewers into a second draft. This step
requires a little patience and tact from the writer, who must recognize
that white paper reviewers aren’t professional writers or editors;
reviewers are business people pressed into doing an editorial task where
some are far more comfortable than others.

As Table 13-3 illustrates, the bulk of this step is up to the writer.
After getting all the reviews, the writer may end up with one Word file
or one online Google Doc, showing everyone’s comments at once. More
likely, the writer gets multiple copies of the same Word file with
changes tracked or comments inserted into each one. The writer and the
client share the responsibility for keeping all comments organized and
making wise decisions on whether to incorporate or overrule each one.
The illustrator may get some comments on the graphics as well; in this
case, the illustrator may need to confer with the client to see how much
rework of the graphics the budget can handle. See the following sections
for details.

Table 13-3 What Happens in Step 8

  ------ ------------- -------------------------------------------------------------
  Step   Who           What
  8.1    Writer        Queries client and reviewers on unclear comments (if any)
  8.2    Writer        Refines text to incorporate comments
  8.3    Illustrator   Refines graphics to incorporate comments
  8.4    Illustrator   Sends second-draft graphics to writer and client
  8.5    Writer        Inserts second-draft graphics into second-draft white paper
  8.6    Writer        Sends second-draft white paper to client
  ------ ------------- -------------------------------------------------------------

What the writer does in this step

As shown in Table 13-3, in Step 8, the writer refines the first draft of
the white paper to incorporate the reviewers’ comments. If any comments
are unclear or contradictory, the writer may need to go back to the
client or a certain reviewer for clarification. After the illustrator
finishes the next round of graphics, the writer generally inserts those
graphics into the file to create a second-draft document to send to the
client. Including the graphics may make the second draft easier for
reviewers to visualize as the finished white paper.

If any change breaks the house style or the designated style guide for
the white paper, the writer should probably reject it. If any change
makes the text more clear, more precise, or more persuasive, he should
probably accept it — and look for other instances in the rest of the
white paper where the same comment applies.

[tip.eps] If you (the writer) have many files with many comments on
every page to deal with, consider printing out every file for reference.
For a six- to eight-page white paper, that won’t use a shameful amount
of paper. Then arrange every printout in a separate pile on your desk
and work through all the comments by looking at each page in every copy
in turn. Try using a system of highlighters to mark each comment in each
printout, such as green for “done,” orange for “rejected,” and yellow
for “query for clarification.”

What the illustrator does in this step

As shown in Table 13-3, in Step 8, the illustrator refines the
first-draft graphics to incorporate the reviewers’ comments. If any
comments are unclear or contradictory, the illustrator may need to go
back to the client or a certain reviewer for clarification. After the
illustrator finishes the next round of graphics, he sends them to the
writer to insert into the second-draft document to send to the client.

Step 9: Gathering Final Comments

This step is a repeat of Step 7. Reviewers should have noticeably fewer
comments at this point than on the first draft. With a properly planned
white paper, the first draft should come back with minimal comments, and
the second, with next to none.

In my experience, creating a finished white paper takes no more than two
drafts of text and graphics. Think about it. All the reviewers had a
chance to air their views during an initial conference call. They all
had a chance to review and approve the white paper plan, the executive
summary for the white paper, and the first- and second-draft text and
graphics. That’s one conference call plus four draft documents. What
more does anyone need?

As you can see in Table 13-4, this step involves only the client and
reviewers. If you fit that bill, check out the following sections for
details; if you’re the writer, you can skip to Step 10 and work on that
while you wait for the final comments.

Table 13-4 What Happens in Step 9

  ------ ----------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Step   Who         What
  9.1    Client      Circulates second-draft white paper to reviewers with deadline for comments
  9.2    Reviewers   Comment on second-draft text and graphics
  9.3    Client      Gathers all comments and resolves any differences
  9.4    Client      Sends final comments on text to writer
  9.5    Client      Sends final comments on graphics to illustrator
  ------ ----------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------

What the client does in this step

As shown in Table 13-4, in Step 9, the client circulates the
second-draft text and graphics to all reviewers with a request to
receive their comments by an appointed deadline (about one week at
most). As the comments come in, the client reviews them to make sure
they make sense and don’t undo any effective changes made to the first
draft. The client sends all the useful comments on the text to the
writer and all the useful comments on the graphics to the illustrator.

Dealing with comments on the second draft

No magic formula exists for dealing with comments on the second-draft
text and graphics. You should have noticeably fewer comments because the
writer and illustrator either incorporated all the earlier comments or
ignored them on the advice of the client. If a reviewer makes the same
comments all over again, he may be a tug-o-warrior, unwilling to
relinquish a single point. In this case, deal with this pest as
described in Chapter 11.

For simplicity’s sake, this description covers a document prepared the
conventional way, with drafts done in Word and e-mailed to reviewers to
mark up with Track Changes. For the white papers I do online with Google
Docs, things are never quite this neat and tidy. Because all reviewers
can see every other reviewer’s comments, often side discussions or
polite disagreements among reviewers occur. But the same principles
remain: Get all reviewers involved from the start, make sure the client
provides some guidance to the writer, and keep everyone focused on
implementing comments that matter to the target audience and help
achieve the white paper’s intended purpose.

Step 10: Collecting and Checking Sources

Just about every white paper needs a few references to back up its
arguments and showcase the research behind it. Some have a dozen or
more, and a few will top 20 footnotes in one document. For the writer,
keeping all those sources straight can be challenging. But not doing so
defeats the point of finding them in the first place. And if the client
is queried later and can’t produce any sources, it detracts from the
company’s credibility.

In this step, the writer bundles all the sources cited in the white
paper and sends them to the client. All white paper writers should
follow this step for several good reasons:

[check.png] To back up all their research for safekeeping

[check.png] To enable the client to spot-check a few references and make
sure the citations are letter-perfect before the white paper is
published

[check.png] To mark themselves as true professionals who do their
homework and stand behind their work

Refer to Table 13-5 and the following sections for full details of Step
10.

Table 13-5 What Happens in Step 10

  ------ -------- ----------------------------------------------
  Step   Who      What
  101.   Writer   Assembles all sources as PDFs
  10.2   Writer   Keys file names of sources to footnotes
  10.3   Writer   Sends sources to client
  10.4   Client   Spot-checks sources (if required)
  10.5   Client   Files sources with white paper project files
  ------ -------- ----------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

What happens if writers skip this step?

Most white paper writers never provide any sources to the client. This
lazybones approach creates a major gap in the quality control of the
document. Will no one from the client’s side ever check any sources
quoted by the writer? What happens six months later if a skeptical
reader challenges a reference and asks to see it?

If the client has all the sources close at hand, he can quickly respond
to any queries and send sources to readers as PDFs. But if the client
has no sources on file, he must go back to the writer, try to rediscover
that source, or else ignore those queries. Knowing how material on the
web comes and goes, the original source may no longer be online at the
original URL. What then?

If the client tells a prospect he can’t find a source, this defeats the
whole purpose of the white paper and undermines the company’s
credibility. Isn’t it better for the writer to take a few minutes to
provide all the sources to the client when the project is still fresh in
their minds?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Ideally, Step 10 shouldn’t require a big crunch near the end of a white
paper. All writers should keep their research in good order throughout
the project. Doing so can feel a little “picky” at first, but like any
healthy habit, the more you do it, the more natural it becomes. And
writers can attend to this step while waiting for final comments back
from the client from Step 9; the worst that can happen is writers may
have to rejig the order of a few sources before sending them in. For
details about finding strong evidence to build a case, citing references
in the text, and formatting footnotes, see Chapter 15.

[truestory_property.eps] A few times, long after I finished a white
paper, a client came back to me asking for a source quoted in that
paper. Perhaps a reader asked about it or perhaps a company executive
was looking for a good factoid for a slide. By then, that sometimes
meant searching for that source all over again. Since I started keeping
my sources better organized and giving my clients a bundle of sources
for them to file, I haven’t had a single request like that.

What the writer does in this step

As shown in Table 13-5, in Step 10, the writer gathers all the sources
referenced in the white paper, keys them to the same numbers as the
footnotes, and sends all the sources to the client. Throughout this
step, the writer uses PDF as much as possible as the universal file
format:

[check.png] For a web page or blog post, the writer makes careful note
of the precise URL and captures that web page as a PDF.

[check.png] For a printed report or a book, the writer scans the pages
to PDF.

[check.png] For Word, Excel, or PowerPoint documents, the writer can
either save those as PDFs or keep them in their native formats.

The writer can actually send the sources to the client ahead of the
final text, or with the final text, as described later in “Step 12:
Wrapping Up the Project.”

What the client does in this step

As shown in Table 13-5, in Step 10, the client receives the bundle of
sources from the writer. Then he can spot-check any references or quotes
in the white paper as he wants and file away those PDFs with the rest of
the project files for future reference.

Saving source material as PDFs

No client wants to get a hodge-podge of HTML, screen grabs, PDFs, and
other file formats. That just complicates life. Instead, I recommend
that the writer takes a few minutes to bring everything into one
universal format.

If you’re the writer and you’re pulling white paper references from
reports you found online, web pages, books, or printed documents,
consider all these reasons for storing these sources as PDFs:

[check.png] Some of your research is already in PDF format.

[check.png] For web pages, you can print to a PDF, which saves the
content even if that URL changes or that page is taken down (details in
the following sections).

[check.png] For printed documents, you can scan to a PDF (details in the
following sections).

[check.png] PDFs are easy to access with free readers from Adobe or
third parties.

[tip.eps] PDF is an industry standard that will likely remain easy to
access for the foreseeable future. To be doubly sure that you can always
open your sources, archive the current version of Adobe Reader along
with your sources. Or bookmark the page on the Adobe website
(http://get.adobe.com/reader/otherversions) where you can download
earlier versions of the reader.

Saving web pages as PDFs with Windows

Some of your research will likely come from web pages or blogs. Using
Windows, you have several ways to save web pages as PDFs.

[check.png] If you have Adobe Acrobat — the commercial product, not the
free PDF reader called Adobe Reader — you can print anything on your
screen to a PDF. Here’s how:

1. Navigate to the web page you want and select File and then Print from
your browser.

2. In the Print dialog, select Adobe PDF for your printer and click OK.

3. In the Save PDF File As dialog, navigate to your folder of white
paper sources, enter a suitable file name, and click Save.

To find a suitable file name, follow the suggestions in the later
section “Keying sources to footnotes.” From the Print dialog, you can
also click Properties to adjust the properties of your PDF, but the
defaults should work fine.

[check.png] If you don't have Adobe Acrobat, you can create a PDF from
any web page by using many free utilities and online services. Simply
Google "free HTML to PDF converter" to see the range of possibilities.
One of my favorite free web-page-to-PDF utilities is from Outside
Software, available at
www.html-to-pdf.net/free-online-pdf-converter.aspx. You copy the URL of
the page you want to save and paste it into the converter page, and your
PDF is created for free. You just need to give it a file name and save
it; the whole process takes a few seconds.

Saving web pages as PDFs with Mac OS

On the Mac, this feature (like many others) is built in.

 1. Navigate to the web page you want and select File and then Print
from your browser.

2. In the Print dialog, click PDF and select Save as PDF.

3. In the Save dialog, navigate to your folder of sources, give a
suitable file name, and click Save.

To find a suitable file name, follow the suggestions in the “Keying
sources to footnotes” section, later in this chapter. From the Print
dialog, you can also add metadata, like Author, Subject, and Keywords,
if those will help you keep your sources straight. Most people don’t
bother with those just for sources.

Scanning print to PDF

Do you have a printed document or book that you can't find online? You
may be able to scan directly to PDFs. Check your scanner manual or
online help. If your scanner can't create PDFs, use the free utility
iCopy, available from www.icopy.sourceforge.net. iCopy gives any scanner
the ability to turn out PDFs from printed pages. And it drives the
scanner's document feeder so you don't have to stand over the machine
like a zombie, feeding one page at a time, getting more and more tempted
not to bother scanning the whole thing.

Including all the pages

E-mailing a ten-page PDF that you quoted from is easy. But sometimes you
want to pluck out a single reference from the executive summary of a
monster 280-page report. Even though that report is already a PDF, it
can be tempting to send the client just a single page or maybe just the
four-page executive summary. Think of all those megabytes no one has to
deal with!

But remember the purpose of this step: to support fact-checking and
answer any future queries from readers. Does sending a single page and
deleting the other 279 help further these goals? Or is it a false
economy that saves nothing but disk space, which is getting cheaper all
the time? I believe it’s better to send the whole source file. When
you’re providing source material, you can’t really have TMI (too much
information).

[warning_bomb.eps] Scanning an entire book is illegal under U.S.
copyright laws, as Google found out when authors and publishers sued it
for scanning several whole university libraries. So this is the
exception where I don’t recommend scanning the whole document. Just scan
the title, copyright page, about the author, and the chapter with the
information you cited.

Keying sources to footnotes

Don’t send the client a set of PDFs with random file names. To make life
easier for everyone, create a table to match each source to a footnote
number in the final white paper. The simplest way is to use a number in
the file name of each PDF that corresponds to the associated footnote,
as shown in Table 13-6. Doing so makes finding any source as easy as
one-two-three. It creates an orderly workflow, too: The writer can
simply work through the list of footnotes, finding or saving each PDF in
turn with a matching number.

Table 13-6 How to Key Sources to Footnote Numbers

  ----------------------------------------------------- ---------- -------------------------------------------------
  Original File Name of Source                          Footnote   File Name of Source Submitted
  ACME_special_report_2012.pdf                          1          1-ACME_special_report_2012.pdf
  www.acme.com/blog/may-27-2013.htm                     2          2-acme.com-blog-may-27-2013.pdf
  www.acme.com#benefits.html                            3          3-acme.com-benefits.pdf
  www.big-consulting-firm.com/big-industry-report.pdf   4 and 7    4-7-big-consulting-firm-big-industry-report.pdf
  ----------------------------------------------------- ---------- -------------------------------------------------

[tip.eps] Create a folder called something like “Sources to Submit,” and
then save each PDF in that folder as you number it. That way, all the
PDFs line up by their numbers so you can easily see whether you’re
missing any. Then just e-mail the client every file in that folder.
They’ll line up neatly on his side, too.

What if you have two or three references from the same source? That can
easily happen with a long, definitive report. In that case, there’s no
point in sending the same source more than once. Instead, as shown in
the last row of Table 13-6, just enter all the footnote numbers in order
at the start of the file name. Then you can still scan down the list of
file names and spot that item easily.

Spot-checking sources

If you’re the client, you can simply file away the bundle of sources
with the rest of the white paper project files. But why not do a little
quality control and spot-check a few references to make sure they’re
letter-perfect? How many sources should you check? In a list of eight
sources, check two or three; if they all turn up perfect, call that
enough. But if you find any issues, check every source in the document.

 1. Open the white paper and find the first footnote you want to check.

2. Open the PDF that starts with the same footnote number.

3. Search for the exact text or fact given in the white paper and
confirm that it’s on the page given in the footnote.

4. Read both the source document and the reference to make sure they’re
exact.

What if you can’t find anything in the source to match the reference in
the white paper? What if it sort of matches but seems taken out of
context or distorted? First, aren’t you glad you checked? Next, realize
the vast range of possible explanations.

It can be a simple mix-up on file names that you can straighten out
yourself. Start at the first footnote in the white paper and run through
your folder of source PDFs. The writer could have easily skipped over
one and got all the file names out of order from that point on. Find the
spot for the missing source and check whether it’s anywhere else in your
list with the wrong name. If not, ask the writer to provide you a new
set of sources with the missing one and all the rest of the PDF file
names numbered properly.

If it’s a matter of interpretation, use your common sense. Can you
rewrite the sentence to create a more accurate reference and then run
that by the writer as a comment? Give that a try. Or is it something
more serious? Do you suspect that the writer made up a quote from thin
air and claimed he found it in a certain report?

In any case, you need to get back to the writer and have a frank
discussion. Tell him what you found, and ask him to explain. You don’t
want your white paper — and your company’s credibility — to rest on
shoddy sourcing. Most likely, the writer will have an innocent
explanation, and it’s great that you caught the slip-up before you
released the white paper.

[truestory_property.eps] I was working on a white paper about an
emerging market that one VP at the client claimed was worth $3.25
billion a year. He swore he’d read that somewhere; he just couldn’t
remember where. After days of digging, I turned up an analyst’s report
with the revenues for that market projected at $32.5 million a year. I
kept quizzing him for his source, but he never produced it. I finally
guessed he’d seen the report I found, misread the decimal point, and
used a much higher number from then on. But he was too embarrassed to
admit it. Let’s face it: $3.25 billion is a lot bigger than the number I
could corroborate; in fact, it’s 100 times as big! White papers that
exaggerate numbers that much don’t stand up to much scrutiny. This issue
was never resolved, and that white paper was never published — a victim,
perhaps, of sloppy sourcing.

Handling unused sources

The writer may find some great sources that don’t end up in the white
paper but are still relevant to the topic. If you’re the writer, don’t
just delete those sources and waste all that research! Instead, e-mail
them as a separate bundle to the client with a subject line something
like, “Great sources not used in this white paper.” You may want to call
each of those PDFs something like
“not-used-big-consulting-firm-big-industry-report-2013.pdf.” Then if you
do another white paper for the same client, you can pull on those
sources for that project.

If you’re the client, check out those sources to see whether you can use
them for a blog, slide deck, or any other marketing materials for your
company.

Step 11: Preparing the Final Document

Like a big-name celebrity who just won an Oscar, this step needs no
introduction. It’s an obvious part of any publishing process. Don’t
hurry through it, or you may have some embarrassing mistakes to deal
with later — just like a celebrity who forgets to thank his mother in
his acceptance speech.

As you can see in Table 13-7, in this penultimate step, everyone gets
involved — the writer, illustrator (if any), designer (if any), and
client. The writer makes any final changes in the text, while the
illustrator makes any last tweaks to the graphics. If a designer is
onboard, he pours the text and graphics into his chosen design software
and generates a PDF for the client to review. If no designer was used
for the project, the writer completes the final pages in Word — or his
chosen design software — and generates a PDF for the client to review.

Everyone takes another look-see to make sure no last glitches turn up,
and the designer fixes any final problems. Then the designer delivers
all the source files and the final PDF for the white paper to the
client. At the end of Step 11, the white paper is finished and ready to
be posted on the web.

The following sections explain all the nitty-gritty details of this
step.

Table 13-7 What Happens in Step 11

  ------- ------------- -----------------------------------------------------------
  Step    Who           What
  11.1    Illustrator   Refines graphics to incorporate final comments
  11.2    Illustrator   Sends final graphics to writer, designer, and client
  11.3    Illustrator   Sends invoice to client (if outsourced)
  11.4    Writer        Refines text to incorporate final comments
  11.5    Writer        Sends final text to client and designer
  11.6    Writer        Sends final invoice to client (if outsourced)
  11.7    Designer      Creates draft pages with text and graphics
  11.8    Designer      Generates draft PDF and sends it to client
  11.9    Client        Reviews draft PDF and sends comments (if any) to designer
  11.10   Designer      Refines draft pages and creates final PDF
  11.11   Client        Proofreads final PDF
  11.12   Designer      Puts keywords and other metadata into final PDF
  11.13   Designer      Sends all source files and final PDF to client
  11.14   Designer      Sends invoice to client (if outsourced)
  ------- ------------- -----------------------------------------------------------

What the illustrator does in this step

As shown in Table 13-7, in Step 11, the illustrator refines the graphics
to incorporate any final comments from reviewers and sends them to the
writer, the designer (if any), and the client. When the client is
satisfied with the graphics, the illustrator (if outsourced) sends in an
invoice.

What the writer does in this step

As shown in Table 13-7, in Step 11, the writer refines the white paper
to incorporate any final comments from reviewers and sends the final
text to the client and the designer. If the writer is from outside the
company, he sends in his final invoice.

If the project has no designer, the writer does all the tasks assigned
to the designer in Table 13-7: Prepares the final pages in Word — or his
chosen design software — and creates a draft PDF for the client to
approve. (See Chapter 18 for tips on designing a white paper.) If the
client has any comments, the writer/designer refines the pages to
incorporate these comments and then sends the client another PDF. When
the client is satisfied, the writer/designer inserts the proper keywords
and metadata into the PDF for SEO purposes and (if outsourced) sends in
his final invoice, which may include a separate fee for page design.

What the designer does in this step

As shown in Table 13-7, in Step 11, the designer pours the final text
and graphics into pages for the white paper and creates a draft PDF for
the client to approve. If the client has any comments or spots any
glitches in the PDF, the designer makes the required fixes and sends the
client another draft PDF. The client and designer repeat this process
until everyone is satisfied with the final PDF. Then the designer
inserts the appropriate keywords and metadata into the PDF for SEO
purposes and (if outsourced) sends in an invoice. In my experience, the
first set of PDFs come back with a few formatting comments and the
second with next to none. In fact, by that point the client is usually
tired of looking at the thing, and he just wants to get it out and start
promoting it.

What the client does in this step

As shown in Table 13-7, in Step 11, the client reviews the draft PDF of
the final white paper and gives any comments to the designer. The client
may repeat this process once or twice, until he’s completely satisfied
with the final PDF. The client may want to review the list of keywords
compiled in Step 3 before the designer inserts them into the final PDF
for SEO purposes.

Proofing final pages

No matter how many times you check a document, you can always miss
something. Any mistakes that happen during the design steps can be
especially tough to spot. When you get the final PDF of the white paper,
arrange to have two or three team members who’ve never seen it before
give it a careful proofing on hard copy. Table 13-8 lists some of the
classic visual and typographical mistakes to watch for when proofing a
white paper at the PDF stage.

Table 13-8 Checklist for Proofing a White Paper

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Item                              | What to Watch For                 |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Bullets                           | All formatted the same? All the   |
|                                   | same size? All the same shape?    |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Colors                            | All match or harmonize? All from  |
|                                   | the same corporate palette? All   |
|                                   | print out clearly in black and    |
|                                   | white?                            |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Contents                          | All entries match the actual      |
|                                   | headings? Any missing entries?    |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| E-mail addresses                  | All correct? Did you test to make |
|                                   | sure they work?                   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Footers                           | Every page has a footer? All      |
|                                   | formatted the same?               |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Footnotes                         | All formatted the same? All lead  |
|                                   | to proper references?             |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Graphics                          | All figure numbers, titles, and   |
|                                   | captions correct? All formatted   |
|                                   | the same?                         |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   | All graphics print clearly in     |
|                                   | color? In black and white?        |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Headers                           | Every page has a header? All      |
|                                   | formatted the same?               |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Headings                          | All headings formatted correctly? |
|                                   | All the proper size?              |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Lists                             | All numbers in correct order? All |
|                                   | items formatted the same?         |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Logos                             | All used properly, not stretched  |
|                                   | or squeezed? All colors correct?  |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Margins                           | All the same on every page?       |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Math                              | All figures add up? All formulas  |
|                                   | work out correctly?               |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Page numbers                      | Every page has a number? In       |
|                                   | correct order? All formatted the  |
|                                   | same?                             |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Phone numbers                     | All correct? Did you dial them to |
|                                   | make sure they work?              |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Style sheet                       | All styles applied consistently?  |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Tables                            | All table numbers and titles      |
|                                   | correct? All formatted the same?  |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Text                              | All formatted correctly? Proper   |
|                                   | fonts? Proper sizes?              |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Web links                         | All correct? Did you test them to |
|                                   | make sure they work?              |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

By this point, all the text has been reviewed and approved many times,
but if your proofers spot any text that they find inconsistent or hard
to understand, you probably want to make some final fixes to those
passages.

[truestory_property.eps] I was recently asked to update a white paper
for a company that’s a household name around the world. To my shock, the
first word in the title on the cover was misspelled! That document was
distributed for three years and seen by an unimaginable number of B2B
prospects. How do you think such a prominent typo affected their
impression of that document and that offering? The moral: Give your
final PDF to someone who has never seen it before. A fresh pair of eyes
can often spot mistakes that everyone else overlooked.

Putting keywords in the PDF

Not everyone knows this, but web spiders can index PDFs found on the web
so that they show up in search results. That’s why you should always
include useful keywords right in the PDF of any white paper you post
online. You already specified these keywords in Step 3, remember? In
this step, the client may want to review this list. Then the writer or
designer can insert all the keywords and other appropriate metadata in
the final PDF.

Inserting metadata in a PDF

With the right software, the writer or designer can insert keywords and
other data into the finished PDF for the white paper. You can enter
metadata with Adobe Acrobat (the commercial product), InDesign, Word
2007 or 2010 for Windows, or a neat little Mac OS utility called
CombinePDFs.

[check.png] If you have Adobe Acrobat — the commercial product, not the
free Adobe Reader — you can insert metadata into your white paper PDF by
following these steps:

1. Open the white paper PDF with Acrobat and select File then
Properties.

2. In the Document Properties dialog, on the Description panel, enter
your preferred title, author, subject, and keywords (separated by
commas) in the appropriate text boxes and click OK.

3. Select File and Save.

[check.png] If you have InDesign, you can insert metadata in your white
paper file and then generate another PDF. If your designer doesn’t know
how to do this, share the following process with him:

1. Open the white paper file with InDesign and select File then File
Info.

2. In the File Info dialog box, enter your preferred document title,
author, description, and keywords (separated by commas) in the
appropriate text boxes and click OK.

3. Select File then Save, and then select File and Export.

4. In the Export dialog, select Adobe PDF with your regular PDF options
and click OK.

[check.png] If you have Word 2007 or 2010 for Windows, you can insert
metadata in a less obvious way. Here’s how:

1. Open the white paper file with Word, press Alt + F, and select
Prepare then Properties.

2. In the Document Information panel, enter your preferred title,
subject, and keywords (separated by commas) in the appropriate text
boxes.

3. Press Alt + F and select Save As and then PDF or XPS.

4. In the Publish as PDF or XPS dialog, navigate to the folder you want,
enter a suitable file name, and click Publish.

[tip.eps] If you have Word 2007 and you don't see the Save As PDF or XPS
option, you need to install the free Save As PDF or XPS add-in from
Microsoft (www.microsoft.com/en-us/download/details.aspx?id=7) and then
follow the preceding steps.

[check.png] If you have a Mac, you can use Adobe Acrobat or InDesign as
described earlier. Or you can use a nifty piece of freeware that makes
up for the limitations of Preview called Combine PDFs
(http://monkeybreadsoftware.de/Freeware/CombinePDFs.shtml). After you
have Combine PDFs running, here's what to do:

1. Select File and Add Files.

2. In the Open dialog, select the white paper PDF and click Open; select
Options and then Add Metadata.

3. In the Add Metadata dialog, enter your preferred title, author,
subject, and keywords (separated by commas) and click OK.

4. Click Merge PDFs in the lower-right corner.

5. In the Save dialog, enter a file name and click Save.

Note that CombinePDFs is shareware, so after you process 1,000 pages
with it, it asks that you pay for a license. If you use it that much,
you really should shell out for it.

Whatever software you use, check your keywords after you finish to make
sure everything worked, as described in the next section.

Viewing metadata in a PDF

You can see — but not change — the keywords and other metadata in any
PDF. What you see depends on the software you use.

[check.png] Under Windows with the free Adobe Reader, open the PDF,
select File then Properties, and click the Description tab. You can see
the existing title, author, subject, and keywords (if any).

[check.png] Under Mac OS with Preview, open the PDF, select Tools then
Show Inspector, and click the magnifying glass button. You can see the
existing keywords (if any).

Step 12: Wrapping Up the Project

Everyone knows how to wrap up a white paper, right? If you’re the
client, order a couple of large Hawaiian pizzas (with anchovies and hot
peppers — woo hoo!) and invite your whole team to the picnic table out
back. If you’re a contract writer, e-mail your final invoice, order one
large Hawaiian with anchovies and hot peppers, and scarf down the whole
thing by yourself.

Team-building lunches are great, but there’s more to wrapping up a white
paper than that. Any loose ends you leave dangling can trip you up
later. Step 12 describes everything you should do to close the file on
your white paper before you reach for the menu for Uncle Wheezy’s
Cheezee Pizza.

This step includes taking care of three Ps: payments, permissions, and
perhaps a postmortem. This step ties up any loose ends about the project
in a businesslike way. Table 13-9 outlines this step, and the following
sections fill you in on why this step is so important.

Table 13-9 What Happens in Step 12

  ------ ----------- --------------------------------------------------------
  Step   Who         What
  12.1   Client      Pays all invoices
  12.2   Client      Gets permissions for sources or graphics (if required)
  12.3   Creatives   Transfer all copyright to client (if outsourced)
  12.4   Creatives   Request a copy of the final white paper for a sample
  12.5   Creatives   Request using that client as a reference
  12.6   All         Hold a postmortem to discuss project
  ------ ----------- --------------------------------------------------------

What the client does in this step

As shown in Table 13-9, in Step 12, the client pays all invoices from
the writer, the illustrator, and the designer (collectively called
creatives), arranges for any necessary permissions for sources or
graphics, and perhaps does a postmortem on the project with the writer
and the reviewers to assess what went well and what could have gone
better.

What the creatives do in this step

If the white paper writer, illustrator, and designer are company
employees, they don’t need to invoice or transfer their copyrights,
because the white paper is clearly work for hire. If any of these
creatives are contractors from outside the company, they already sent an
invoice for their work in Step 11. As shown in Table 13-9, when that
invoice is paid, they transfer all the copyrights to the white paper
text, graphics, or page design to the client. They may want to get a
final PDF of the document from the client as a sample and ask whether
they can use the client for a reference.

Making payments — the faster, the better

Being a good client for any contractor on your white paper team comes
down to a few simple things: Be reasonable, give clear direction, and
most of all, pay promptly. Cutting a check in 30 days and sending it by
snail mail won’t thrill any freelancer, and making him wait 60 days can
be downright irritating. Sending him a wire transfer the same day you
get his invoice, now, that’s memorable. After all, your creatives aren’t
in the same galaxy as a giant corporation like, say, Acme Scanners, with
millions in sales and a huge cash flow. Each of them is more likely a
one-person microbusiness, operating out of a home office that can handle
only two or three clients at a time.

Try to finagle your finance people to pay freelancers faster than giant
corporations. Find out whether you can pay by wire transfer rather than
by check, which can shave off a week of postage and handling. Consider
paying with your corporate credit card, or even a personal credit card,
then expensing that to the company. And if one of your outsourced team
members queries you about an invoice, go to bat for him; don’t throw up
your hands and tell him it’s with your Accounts Payable. In the future,
if a contractor has to choose between doing a project for you or for any
other client, he’ll remember who paid him faster last time, which will
help him make up his mind.

[truestory_property.eps] I’ve had the odd invoice go astray. Once, my
client printed out the invoice I e-mailed, but it slipped down behind
her piled-high desk and was missing for two months. She was good natured
during my inquiries and put through a duplicate invoice. When she
finally did some housecleaning and found the lost one, we both had a
good laugh. That’s the kind of relationship you want to build with your
creatives.

Getting permissions

Some consulting firms and publishers want vendors to ask permission
before quoting from their articles or reports in any marketing material.
Getting permissions is the client’s responsibility, but it’s certainly
easier to do when you have a copy of the source document on hand that
the writer provides in Step 11. And you may want to have an alternative
source in mind if that third party says no.

Now suppose you have a channel partner with a good graphic you want to
use in the white paper. So you call up your contact at that company and
ask whether it’s okay to use the graphic. Is that sufficient permission?
Probably not. In this case, I recommend sending an e-mail, attaching the
white paper, and asking for an acknowledgment and more formal permission
back, probably from a member of the partner’s legal team. You’re not
likely to get sued by a good channel partner, but why be sloppy? That’s
just another loose end to tie up.

Transferring copyrights

Although copyright rules vary by country, if a writer sends a note or
e-mail permanently transferring all his copyright to a white paper, that
should eliminate any possibility of any future legal hassles. A simple
e-mail like the following will suffice:

For consideration received, I, [name of creative], permanently transfer
all my copyright to the white paper entitled [name of white paper] to
[name of client’s company] as of [date].

Doing a postmortem

Many larger consulting firms do a postmortem after every engagement, but
a postmortem isn’t a standard practice for white paper clients and
writers. Perhaps it should be; nearly everyone can benefit by reviewing
what went right and what could have gone better about a project.

If you do hold a postmortem, you can make it as large or small a group
as possible. Get everyone together on a conference call, a
teleconference, or an in-person meeting, or perhaps more informally over
a coffee or lunch.

[tip.eps] However you assemble your team, follow this number-one ground
rule: Keep things constructive by focusing on processes, not
personalities. Instead of saying, “Your comments on the second draft
were ridiculous!” — which can only get someone’s back up — say, “We need
to work out how to resolve any contradictory comments that come in late
in the process.” Instead of pointing fingers and blaming someone else,
try to identify something you can all work on solving together. The
difference is amazing.

OceanofPDF.com

Part IV

Succeeding with White Papers

Five Must-Dos for White Paper Writers

1. Read other white papers and any nonfiction that stimulates and
inspires you and keep your own file of notable idea.

2. Write every day, any type of B2B material but especially any white
papers you have a chance to work on.

3. Rewrite to polish drafts, with help from your computer to read back
your drafts and show objective statistics on your writing.

4. Learn from style guides, follow house style, and create your own
style guide.

5. Refine your writing process with best practices and fresh ideas that
can bring out your top efforts.

[pt_webextra_bw.TIF] You may benefit from working with a researcher when
it's time to gather information for a white paper. For tips on making
the most of the relationship, check out the free online article at
www.dummies.com/extras/whitepapers.

In this part . . .

[check.png] Discover how to build a strong white paper based on powerful
facts, figures, opinions, and rhetoric.

[check.png] Get inspired to do your best writing with tips and ideas to
make the process easier and faster.

[check.png] Pick from dozens of marketing tactics to let your audience
know your white paper exists.

OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 14

Doing Research: Think Like a Lawyer

In This Chapter

[arrow] Building an unbeatable case for your white paper

[arrow] Looking for the best evidence in the best places

[arrow] Organizing your research

[arrow] Picking the most effective form of citations

Every white paper needs solid evidence to make its case. After all,
writing that your company is the best isn’t difficult. But finding
compelling evidence to prove that beyond a shadow of a doubt can be
tough. Doing research to turn up the right nuggets of proof gives your
white paper more authority. Strong evidence creates affinity with the
reader, strengthens your claims, and proves that your white paper is
more than one vendor’s opinion.

Someone has to dig up all those sources, and that someone is likely the
writer. Throughout your research process (as described in Chapter 12),
my best advice is to think like a lawyer — and not some polite lawyer in
a tailored suit in an air-conditioned office on the 99th floor. No, you
have to think like a mad-dog lawyer, a street-fighting mongrel with big
teeth and yellow eyes and no interest in a win-win. To research your
white paper properly, you have to be the toughest dog in the
neighborhood.

In this chapter, I describe how to find powerful proof to build your
argument, engage your readers, and compel them to take action. This
chapter shows four ways to evaluate references for maximum impact, and
lists almost 20 possible sources, noting which ones are most acceptable
for a white paper. And it describes how to organize your research and
choose between three formats for references.

[truestory_property.eps] I once spent a day in the biggest library in
Toronto, Ontario, Canada, trying to track down the references in several
white papers from a Fortune 200 company. Even with the librarians’ help,
I had no success: Turns out that all the sources were vague articles not
supported by any research. Clearly, the writers of those white papers
never bothered to check those sources but simply parroted all the claims
floating around the office. Now, I mistrust that company and will never
buy anything from it again. I’m only one person. But what if I were a
B2B buyer doing my due diligence, and that sloppy research cost the
company a million-dollar sale? Don’t let this happen! Dig up valid
sources, cite them properly, and put together a case that won’t fall
apart under a little cross-examination.

Your Goal: Building an Open-and-Shut Case

When you think like a lawyer, you want to build a case so tight that no
judge can question it and no jury can resist it. That means digging up a
mountain of evidence. You need facts and figures, logic and rhetoric.
You need an argument so tight it leaves the other side gasping for air.
You need a flow of ideas so persuasive that your readers declare, “I’ve
heard enough! I’m sold!” and start passing your paper around their
company.

To do that takes research. It takes a lot of digging, sometimes far past
the point where the other side has packed it in and gone home for the
evening. It takes reading past the first screen of search results to see
what else may be there. And it may take more than sitting at your desk
and using Google. It may take hiking over to the nearest city or college
library to consult the reference librarian, logging in to online
databases to pull up journal articles, or finding a relevant association
to contact for an expert witness.

That research usually includes grilling subject matter experts and
executives from the company sponsoring the white paper. Most of all,
this research requires you picturing the other guy trying to poke holes
in your argument. If someone can ask, “Says who?” or “Oh yeah? Prove
it!” you have a gap in your research that you better patch before it’s
too late. You certainly don’t want your white paper to be tossed aside
for lack of proof.

Digging Up Solid Sources and Extracting Relevant Points

Today, you can find more information faster than ever before;
unfortunately, you can also get distracted and waste time very easily.
Digging up strong sources and extracting the choicest nuggets from them
are critical skills that every white paper writer needs. But developing
those skills takes discipline and practice.

When you’re looking for evidence, it helps to know where and how to
look. In the following sections, I discuss four criteria to help
evaluate the strength of any source: proximity, authority, timeliness,
and relevance. Then I list 18 possible sources for white paper proof
points, with notes and tips on each one. Finally, I describe the four
most powerful types of evidence, namely facts, figures, opinions, and
rhetoric. All of this should help you make the most of your research and
build a mountain of evidence that no one else can topple.

Evaluating sources

So you’re thinking like a lawyer and searching for another expert
witness to call or another piece of evidence to introduce as People’s
Exhibit A. Where do you turn? If you’re like most writers, you run some
queries on Google and get a list of search results. But from that list,
how do you choose the most effective sources for your white paper?

First things first. Just like a trial lawyer studying the jury, your
first duty is to make sure you understand your target audience. Are they
IT managers, HR professionals, C-level executives, or what? How old are
they? What’s their education? How do they feel about the issue your
white paper is going to discuss? Does your client have any personas —
descriptions of typical customers — he can share with you? Knowing your
audience, you can look for evidence that will convince those readers.
You’ll need to know enough to evaluate each possible source on these
four key factors:

[check.png] Proximity, or how close the source feels to the reader

[check.png] Authority, or how much weight the source has

[check.png] Timeliness, or how recent the evidence is

[check.png] Relevance, or how well the evidence matches your argument

[remember.eps] An ideal source is strong on all four counts. A likely
source must be strong on at least three. Any source that’s strong on
only two counts is probably not good enough to include in your white
paper. That’s when you have to keep digging.

Proximity

Proximity means “closeness” and comes mainly from being in the same
industry or doing the same job as the reader. For example, a CFO in
consumer electronics will relate to other executives in the same sector,
to CFOs in other companies about the same size, or to others in the
world of finance. On the other hand, a quote from a marketing executive
for an airline won’t have much proximity to a CFO in consumer
electronics. When evaluating proximity, ask yourself how much your
target reader has in common with the expert being quoted. If the answer
is “not much,” you probably need to keep searching — unless the quote
scores highly on all the other three factors.

Authority

Authority means how much “weight” or “gravitas” a source has for a
particular audience. In every field, only a few leading lights stand out
enough to make statements that everyone else listens to. Quote this kind
of authority if you can. See whether you can find which trade
publications your audience reads and which websites they visit. If you
can pull quotes from one of those familiar sources, those points carry
far more authority. Even if you find research that completely supports
your argument, if it comes from an obscure source, you may need to keep
digging.

Timeliness

Everyone likes to keep up-to-date. So the more recent a source, the
better. Let’s face it: Quoting something from 1980 sounds ancient, even
though it may be perfectly valid. If you’re looking to establish a
current industry trend, try to find sources from the past two or three
years. For example, financial stats from before the meltdown in 2008
aren’t always relevant. In fast-moving fields like software or biotech,
anything more than five years old doesn’t hold much water. In other
sectors, you may be able to go back a decade, but always stick to the
most recent sources you can find.

Relevance

You want to find powerful proof to back up your points, all the little
facts or opinions that match your line of argument. So if a source only
half agrees with you or if it’s not exactly talking about the same topic
you are, you may have to keep digging. Think about the source from an
SEO view. Are the same keywords in your title right in the quote you
found? If the reader looks at the article titles in your footnotes, will
the connection to your white paper be obvious? Both of these tests can
reveal the relevance of your sources.

[tip.eps] Beyond these four factors, you also want your actual
references from each source to be brief and punchy. Don’t settle for a
whole paragraph. Look for the absolutely ideal sentence or two from a
report, book, or interview. If it takes a whole paragraph to introduce
and explain a single source, it may not be strong enough. Keep on
looking for that gem buried in all the dreck.

Finding sources for a white paper

The proximity, authority, and timeliness of a source are determined
mainly by where you found it. You may think you can use any source under
the sun in a white paper, but that’s not strictly true. Some sources are
far better than others when it comes to white papers. Table 14-1 lists
all the sources you may think of drawing from for a white paper, from
analysts to Wikipedia, along with my views of how acceptable I consider
each source. I provide a few notes and observations on each source in
the following sections.

Table 14-1 Acceptable and Unacceptable Sources

  -------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Source                                             Acceptable?                        Notes
  Analysts                                           Yes                                As long as they’re credible
  Associations                                       Yes                                As long as they’re established and credible
  Blogs                                              Barely                             Use only if you have no other sources
  Books                                              Yes                                Best to use classics in the field or titles published after 2000
  Consultants                                        Sometimes                          Make sure they’re impartial
  Forums                                             No                                 No credibility, usually anonymous
  Go-to experts                                      Usually                            Make sure they’re impartial
  Government reports                                 Yes                                Usually have high authority
  Industry reports                                   Usually                            Make sure they’re factual
  Magazines                                          Yes                                Best published in the last five years
  Newspapers                                         Usually                            Stick to recognized papers, best published in the last two to three years
  Professors                                         Yes                                Usually have high authority
  Sources inside the company                         Yes for background, not to quote   Good sources for background, but don’t quote them directly because they’re obviously biased
  Trade magazines                                    Yes                                Best published in the last five years
  Websites                                           Not usually                        Be careful quoting from any website
  White papers from other vendors or organizations   Yes                                The more recognized the organization, the better
  White papers from the same company                 No                                 Not convincing, and could create a circular argument
  Wikipedia                                          No                                 Wikipedia is a secondary source; use it to find primary sources
  -------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[remember.eps] A question I get in almost every workshop I give is, “Is
it okay to just make up your sources?” Of course not! Keep digging until
you hit gold. If no evidence exists for the argument you’re trying to
make, don’t make up fake facts to fit. White papers are nonfiction, not
fantasy. Do you want to risk your credibility as a writer, and the
credibility of your client, on the chance that no one will see through
your fabrication?

Analysts

There are hundreds of analyst firms in the world, ranging from one- or
two-person operations to companies with 1,000 and more employees. For a
white paper in the B2B technology domain, stick to well-established
outfits, such as Forrester, Frost & Sullivan, Gartner, IDC, McKinsey &
Company, Pew Research Center, Saugatuck Technology, SMB Group, and
Yankee Group. I’ve quoted all these firms in the past, because their
names convey a lot of authority to IT readers.

You can find a list of more than 400 IT analyst firms at
www.techra.com/analyst-firm-directory-mainmenu-27 and another good
listing at http://analystdirectory.barbarafrench.net. Certain
enterprising souls may well maintain similar directories of analysts for
other sectors, but I haven't had much occasion to need them.

[tip.eps] To find a list of analysts for a specific industry, try
Googling “analyst” and the name for the industry. For example, “analyst
automotive” or “analyst green tech.” You’ll likely get a mix of analyst
sites, analyst reports, blogs, and media stories quoting a certain
analyst. If analysts are credible enough for a major magazine or
newspaper to quote, they’re probably fine for your white paper.

Associations

Every major sector has one or more trade associations to defend its
interests. Many of these associations are well established and generate
solid research that can make an excellent source for a white paper. The
executive directors of these associations can be good interview sources;
they’re usually quite knowledgeable and eager to talk.

[warning_bomb.eps] Be careful, though; some groups are false fronts with
innocent-sounding names set up by industry lobby groups to shape public
opinion. Never reference a group with that cloud of suspicion over its
head. If readers are informed enough to see that you’re quoting from a
group like that, your white paper can be permanently tainted in their
eyes.

[tip.eps] For a good list of American trade associations, try
www.planningshop.com/tradeassociations.asp or
www.weddles.com/associations/index.cfm. Beyond those, the Encyclopedia
of Associations (Gale) is a book and online database of more than
150,000 nonprofits; you can access it through larger public and academic
libraries.

Blogs

[warning_bomb.eps] Anyone with a computer can start a blog. What makes
any blogger’s opinion worth quoting in a white paper? Unless that
blogger is really a somebody, don’t bother with him. You can’t rely on a
blog post to make a major point in a white paper; that proof is just too
flimsy. At most, a blogger can confirm some assertion you’ve already
made, when you have absolutely no other sources to offer, but even
that’s questionable.

Books

Quoting from a book is usually impressive, especially if it’s written by
a big-name author or recognized as a classic in its field. Otherwise, go
for the most recent books you can find. For example, anything published
before the year 2000 can sound outdated.

[tip.eps] If you think a book could be a good source but you can’t find
it in your library — or you just don’t have time to look — check out the
“Look Inside” feature of Amazon. You can search for a phrase you’re
interested in, and if you find it, pick up a sentence or two for a
reference, along with a page number. But you can’t cut and paste from
this feature, so you may want to take a screenshot for your client as
proof of the citation (see Chapter 13 for details on documenting
sources).

Consultants

Just like associations, some consultants are on the payroll of a certain
vendor or lobby. Make sure they’re impartial observers, not someone
being paid on the sly to advance a certain agenda. Good independent
consultants can often hit the nail on the head with an insightful quote.
You may find them already published in a magazine, call them up for a
quick telephone interview, or even pose a question or two by e-mail.

Forums

Some forums are well-moderated homes to civilized, thought-provoking
discussion. Others are a mess of flame wars, illiterate comments, and
hate. In any case, most comments are anonymous, so you can’t attribute
them to anyone. At best, a forum can show which way the wind blows on a
certain issue, but I don’t recommend using forum posts for sources in a
white paper.

Go-to experts

Go-to experts have already established their credibility by being quoted
in major media outlets. They’re usually okay to quote in a white paper,
as long as you establish that they have no axe to grind against any
particular vendor, technology, or sector. Just like a consultant, you
may find a quote already given, or you may request one by phone or
e-mail.

[tip.eps] Many experts are keen for publicity, so you can find them
through free services like Help a Reporter Out (www.helpareporter.com)
or PR Newswire's ProfNet (www.prnewswire.com/profnet). In the United
Kingdom, try ExpertSources at (www.expertsources.co.uk).

Government reports

The U.S. government is one of the biggest publishers in the world.
Taxpayers pay for this material, so you may as well use it. Most
government reports are carefully prepared, and few people challenge the
credibility of a report coming from a government department. If you can
find one, use it.

[tip.eps] The Government Printing Office is a good place to start,
offering a searchable catalog of publications at
http://catalog.gpo.gov/F?RN=185071156 and a bookstore where you can
search by agency at http://bookstore.gpo.gov. Any college or city
reference librarian can also help you find relevant government
publications.

Industry reports

Every industry tends to present itself in the best possible light. Even
so, industry-sponsored research can be a useful source for many white
papers. Many industries have a good handle on the challenges and
trade-offs facing them in the near future. Just make sure you’re dealing
with a fact-based report, not one yearning to turn back the clock or
wishing for a better future. In fact, industry umbrella groups and
associations sometimes publish their own white papers, which can be
interesting to study as you work on your own. As mentioned in the “White
papers from other vendors or organizations” section, quoting from a
white paper from a reputable industry association is usually fine.

Magazines

A reference from a recognized magazine like The Economist or Time can
help build a strong argument. Magazine writers often sum up big issues
in a nutshell, so you can often find a highly relevant quote. To build
timeliness, try not to cite any magazine article much older than five
years. And the more recent, the better. Of course, this is simply a
general rule, and some exceptions prove the rule. If you’re writing
about some major problem that has plagued a certain industry for 50
years and you find a perfect quote from a 1972 magazine, you can use
that source to show how long this problem has been bothering people.

Newspapers

Today is the currency of newspapers, so you want to find the most recent
articles you can, ideally within the past two or three years. Of course,
a recognized newspaper like The New York Times or The Guardian is more
respected than USA Today or a city tabloid. Newspaper stories are best
for confirming some kind of trend you already pointed out. If some topic
has already hit the popular press, it’s mainstream.

Professors

A good academic maintains an overview of his field, above the hubbub of
business affairs. He can weigh new ideas thoughtfully and provide a more
objective view of a market space. An unknown professor probably has more
authority than an unknown analyst or consultant. You can approach
professors as you would any analyst, by phone or e-mail. Remember to
leave lots of time, because academics don’t live by the same deadlines
as business people.

[tip.eps] For most white papers, you need to interview subject matter
experts or executives, and sometimes you need to speak to academics or
analysts. This type of interviewing is a learned skill that gets easier
with practice. For practical tips on handling interviews, check out
www.thatwhitepaperguy.com/white-paper-article-tips-on-interviewing-executives.html.
And for hints on recording your interviews, whether in person, landline,
cellphone, or smartphone, see
www.thatwhitepaperguy.com/white-paper-article-how-to-record-white-paper-interviews.html.

Sources inside the company

Few readers will be impressed with quotes from executives from the white
paper’s sponsor. These people may be excellent background sources and
reviewers, but quoting them directly is pointless. What are they going
to say? That their company has been on the wrong track for the past five
years? That their products don’t work? I’ve been somewhat appalled when
executives have urged me to quote them in a white paper from their
company. Nothing they say will ever be convincing, because everyone
knows they’re biased.

Trade magazines

Trade magazines tend to do a thorough job covering a specific industry,
so if you’re writing about that industry, these sources can provide
excellent background. Again, look for recent pieces published within the
past five years or so. The editor of a trade magazine is like the
executive director of an association; if he’s been there for a while, he
knows the industry like the back of his hand. Many trade magazines
publish an annual directory or list the top 100 firms in that industry.
These lists can be great for helping you find additional sources if you
need them.

Websites

[warning_bomb.eps] Just like a blog, anyone can put up a website to say
anything he feels like. So be careful if you quote from a website. If
that person’s views are so important, why hasn’t he been published in
some mainstream magazine, newspaper, or trade journal? Some
vertical-market websites cover the same ground as a printed trade
magazine, but anything in print tends to have more authority. Although
this idea may be old-fashioned, most people realize that a printed
magazine provides more checks and balances and has more invested in it
than some website that can be here today and gone tomorrow. That’s why I
recommend keeping websites as second-tier sources; and if you can find
any source with more authority, use it instead.

For a discussion on how to evaluate a website's credibility, see
http://tips.peoplesearchpro.com/sher-julian/search-tips/evaluating-web-sites.html.

White papers from other vendors or organizations

[warning_bomb.eps] Quoting from a white paper from another vendor or
organization can be acceptable, with a few caveats to watch out for:

[check.png] Don’t quote from another vendor’s white paper if you compete
for the same B2B sales.

[check.png] Don’t copy from a competitor’s white paper without any
attribution.

[check.png] Don’t quote from the other white paper if it’s nothing more
than a sales pitch.

[check.png] Don’t use material from a white paper if it doesn’t meet the
same mantra as your own: It must provide useful, helpful information
that can help readers understand an issue, solve a problem, or make a
decision. If it does, feel free to quote from it.

Of course, the greater the name recognition of the other organization,
the more credibility it lends to your argument.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Get permission for what you use

Many writers think that if they can find something on the web, they can
use it. Be careful; it’s best to quote only from web pages intended to
be public, like trade magazines or press releases. A costly research
report, internal company slide deck, or post on a forum are materials
you need permission to share.

Suppose you want to use a market-size number from a research report that
sells for $4,995, and the publisher won’t give you permission to use it.
What if you find a press release on the publisher’s site, announcing the
key fact that you wanted? Go ahead and quote it, and footnote the press
release. Or search for a trade magazine that quoted that number, and
then use the publication as the source.

But if you quote from pirated research or somehow manage to access
private materials, you could be in for a nasty fight. You and your
client don’t need the headache.

Of course, the same applies to graphics and photos you find on the web.
Someone created that graphic or took that photo, and she may not want
you to reuse it for commercial purposes. Clicking a photo or graphic
that turned up in a Google search may lead you to a legitimate site
where you can buy that art. Do it. Just grabbing stuff off the web is
for high-school students, not professional white paper writers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

White papers from the same company

If you use one white paper to substantiate another, you may be setting
up a circular argument with no actual proof. Point to other white papers
from the same company only to direct readers to further information, not
for proof of your argument.

Wikipedia

Wikipedia is an amazing project driven by a great spirit of cooperation.
But it’s far from perfect. Articles can contain biases, uninformed
views, and factual errors. Quoting Wikipedia in a white paper won’t
impress anyone; it only makes you look like an amateur. It’s only a
secondary source, anyway. Wikipedia is good for background and to help
track down the original sources you should be citing, which takes only a
few moments: Just look at the bottom of the article to the external
websites and citations, most of which are linked back to original
sources. Then check out those primary sources to get the real goods.

Understanding what makes good evidence

You know you need convincing proof to win your argument, and now you
know where to look for it. But what exactly does it look like? B2B
marketing can be a little more rigorous than those college English
essays you wrote; after all, millions of dollars can be at stake. Proof
points come in many shapes and sizes, but they fall into four main
categories, in descending order of authority:

[check.png] Indisputable facts

[check.png] Rock-solid numbers (figures)

[check.png] Awards, accolades, and acknowledgments (opinions)

[check.png] Unassailable logic (rhetoric)

Indisputable facts

A fact is a concrete and provable reality, as opposed to an opinion,
theory, or claim. Think of a fact as something another lawyer would
stipulate (that’s lawyer-talk for “shut up and agree that it’s true.”)
For example, the sun comes up in the east and sets in the west. Who
wants to argue with that? On the other hand, “that sunrise was
beautiful” is just an opinion. Beautiful is a subjective phrase, not a
fact. Know how to tell the difference. Too many business people try to
pass off vague claims as facts. You have to serve as the stand-in for
the opposing lawyer when you ask, “Says who?” or “Prove it!”

The simplest offering to discuss factually is a piece of hardware that
you can see, touch, and measure. Software is trickier because you see
only the results of running the code, which exists only as electronic
bits, not as a tangible object. And a service or process is the hardest
to describe factually, because it’s conceptual and often varies a little
every time it’s delivered.

Some of the indisputable facts you can use in a white paper include the
following:

[check.png] Actual size, weight, or physical characteristics of the
product

[check.png] List of components or modules in the product

[check.png] Stages or steps in using the product

[check.png] Patents or trademarks granted to the company for the product

[check.png] Standards or certifications granted to the product or
company, such as CE, CSA, Energy Star, ISO, NOM, UL, and so on

Rock-solid numbers

By definition, numbers seem more precise, scientific, and convincing
than words, which are always a little fuzzy and interchangeable. So what
kind of numbers can you use in a white paper? How can you find figures
that no one can possibly argue with? To start, make sure you find the
best statistics from impeccable sources. Then, for a reality check, try
to confirm every stat from a second source.

For example, if one source says a market is worth $3 billion a year, but
another says $3 million, you’ve got some work to do. Delve into how both
sources sized the market, what they included and excluded, and their
methods. If you can’t resolve the difference or find another estimate,
consider giving both as a range of opinion. Don’t just pick the bigger
number and drop the smaller. Can you hear someone objecting, “Says who?
Your Honor, we have a number 1,000 times smaller from an equally
credible source!”

In a way, the numbers you use are somewhat prescribed by which flavor of
white paper you’re researching. For example, in a backgrounder, you can
talk about any numbers to do with the offering, such as the following:

[check.png] Benchmark scores or test results of the product

[check.png] Lines of codes in the software

[check.png] Miles of wiring in each system

[check.png] Number of features or functions provided

[check.png] Person-years it took to create (but don’t exaggerate!)

[check.png] Total installed base, total number of users

[check.png] Years tested, years on the market

In a numbered list, you already have a set of numbers, one for each main
point of your discussion. Don’t clutter up that flavor with many other
numbers, or you’ll dull that impact. In a strange way, the power of
numbers gives the points in a numbered list more gravitas, even if the
whole tone of the piece is tongue-in-cheek.

In a problem/solution white paper, use numbers to show the scope of the
industry-wide problem. How much money is spent fighting it every year?
How much profit does it drain from the industry? Estimate the results
from each existing solution, and show why that’s not enough. And then
give some powerful numbers to prove that your new offering attacks the
problem in a bigger way than anything else. Find some credible numbers
about how much better your new solution works, such as how much time and
money it saves, how much more revenue and profit it generates, how much
longer it lasts, or any other numbers you can justify.

[remember.eps] Percentages are especially tricky. A percentage is
nothing more than a comparison between two other numbers. So if the
jobless rate falls by 10 percent, that sounds great — but it’s all
relative. In absolute terms, if the unemployment rate falls from a
disastrous 20 percent to a still-terrible 18 percent, there’s not much
to cheer about.

[tip.eps] If you can’t find any benchmark tests, consider generating
them yourself. When I worked in a company that sold barcode scanners for
ERP systems, our customers loved the system, but we had no stats on the
actual benefits. One Friday, we set up a test with an Oracle demo
system. We ran a set of transactions, manually typing in every number.
Then we repeated those transactions, using our scanners. That saved 88
percent of the keystrokes and 77 percent of the time. From this simple
test, we got credible numbers that we used in our marketing for the next
several years. By the way, we sourced those as “internal benchmarks, 12
typical transactions in Oracle Applications 11, manual keying versus
automated data entry.”

Awards, accolades, and acknowledgments

Notice how I moved down the list from facts to figures to opinions. But
even though awards, accolades, and acknowledgments are based on
opinions, at least these opinions all come from third parties, so they
still boost a B2B vendor’s credibility. And if your offering ever wins
an industry award, appears in a magazine article or review, or gets
included in an analyst report, that counts for something, too. Most of
all, if you have any customers who are raving fans, you can incorporate
a brief testimonial or case study in your white papers; certainly this
type of an opinion would fit nicely into a backgrounder.

Any of these sources fall into this category of third-party opinions:

[check.png] Analyst reports

[check.png] Awards, best-of, editor’s choice

[check.png] Customer testimonials

[check.png] Favorable comments from experts

[check.png] List of top 100 firms

[check.png] Reviews or third-party endorsements

Unassailable logic

This category isn’t really evidence; it’s a logical argument or
rhetorical device. When you can’t prove some claim one way or another
with facts, figures, or even opinions, you must resort to rhetoric. You
can’t do this throughout your entire white paper, though, because that
means you have no more powerful evidence to provide. But if the rest of
your paper is backed up well, and what you say on one point or another
is thoughtful and reasonable, most readers will give you the point. A
little knowledge of rhetoric can really pay off here. Make sure your
argument is like all the rest of your evidence: tough, solid, and free
from any obvious flaws.

For example, you can ask a rhetorical question — especially in a
numbered list — without ever answering it. This device can be useful for
casting doubt or suspicion on another vendor’s offering, as in, “Is it
wise to pay ten times as much for a scanner that does less than the Acme
ScanOMatic 3000?” A rhetorical question hangs in the air without being
answered, but everyone knows the only sensible answer.

[remember.eps] When you have enough sources at your fingertips, use the
facts or figures first. When you run out of facts and figures, then use
opinions or rhetoric. Don’t try to build your white paper on rhetoric
alone; doing so creates a brochure or a sales pitch, not a white paper.

Keeping Track of a Mountain of Research

As you build an intimidating mountain of research, you need to keep
everything organized so you can find what you need when you start
writing. If you haven’t had to handle this amount of research since
college — and you never did it well back then either — don’t panic.
You’re an adult now, and organizing your research isn’t hard. Here are
four ways to keep track of your white paper research:

[check.png] Index cards

[check.png] Microsoft Word

[check.png] Microsoft Word plus index cards

[check.png] Evernote or equivalent web-based software

I don’t recommend a database; in fact, I’ve never heard of a white paper
writer using a database to compile his research. That’s overkill for a
ten-page white paper with six or eight sources. Just like it’s overkill
to use Word’s built-in features for citations and sources. The most
research I ever had to manage was for a set of three white papers for
one client. I found more than 40 sources I stored in a giant binder and
used Word to type up my notes.

In fact, the best practices I recommend in this book for tracking your
research and sending your client all your sources (see Chapter 13) go
way beyond what most white paper writers do today.

Writing out index cards

This tried-and-true method has been used for at least as long as anyone
has been writing white papers. Many people recommend using the top-left
section of the index card to write a code number, which can point to a
numbered file of original documents or even the section of your paper
where you can see using that reference. Then use the top right for the
actual citation: author, title, publisher, date, and page. Of course,
the main body is for the actual quote. When you finish, you have a nice
little stack of research in delightfully tangible form that you can
shuffle and reshuffle to your heart’s content.

Another take on this basic idea is to use large sticky notes, one for
each source, and then arrange and rearrange them on a flat surface like
a large piece of cardboard, an open file folder, or even your wall.

[tip.eps] If you like the idea of index cards but don’t fancy scribbling
all your sources by hand, try using this approach with Microsoft
PowerPoint. Consider each slide an index card, and type in your original
research as a set of slides. Then you can use the Slide Sorter feature
(from the View tab) to arrange your slides in the ideal flow. Because
you’re working on-screen with everything typed in, when you need any
sources or citations, you already have them in electronic form.

Typing and printing out a Word file

When I use Word for my research, I first run some massive web searches,
downloading and printing any articles that look interesting to me. When
I’ve covered enough ground, I scan through the hard-copy file,
highlighting the choice bits, scribbling ideas in the margins, and
attaching sticky notes to pages I want to find later. This process can
take a few hours. Then I go through the hard copies in front of my
computer, typing all the best quotes into a Word file, one page per
source, with precise citations. My selected excerpts form another, much
smaller printout that I slip into the top of my research file.

When I write the executive summary (see Chapter 12), I pull out my
excerpt file, knowing I can always dive back into the source material,
which is right at my fingertips. What could be easier?

Okay, I’m sure some people will think that this process is hopelessly
outdated, because they like to store all their research on their
iWhatevers. But I still like being able to sort and shuffle paper and to
get something done even if the power goes off or the iCloud temporarily
blows away.

Putting them together: Word plus index cards

You can also combine index cards with the computer. Here’s one way. Type
all your research in Word, and then go through a hard copy and highlight
the sources you want to use in your white paper. Cut out each source and
tape it to an index card. If you want, you can create one card for each
main point or section of your argument, and then arrange your sources
where they fit best to support each point. Then you can merrily shuffle
and reshuffle your index cards until you get the perfect flow of ideas.
You can even do that in a coffee shop or on the kitchen table.

Managing content with Evernote

If you want to use a cloud-based app to manage your white paper
research, a good choice is Evernote. Users appreciate that it comes in
numerous versions that cover Windows, Mac OS, all different mobile
devices, and various web browsers. You can use Evernote to save stray
ideas, web articles, scanned articles, photos, graphics, status reports,
or pretty much anything else you come across in your white paper
research. And you can sync all your devices so that all your notes are
with you no matter which device you have at hand.

For a great introduction to using Evernote for managing content
marketing ideas and drafts — which can easily include white papers —
check out
http://contentmarketinginstitute.com/2012/05/evernote-for-content-marketing.

Choosing Footnotes or Endnotes

After you gather all your evidence, how are you going to present it?
Part of this decision depends on your skill as a writer, as I explain in
Chapter 15. Another decision you should think about is whether to
present your evidence by using footnotes, endnotes, or in-text
citations. Naturally, each approach has strengths and drawbacks, as
shown in Table 14-2.

Table 14-2 Pros and Cons of Citation Types

  ------------------- ----------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------
  Type                Pros                                                  Cons
  Footnotes           Give more academic look, showcase research            Interrupt reading, draw reader’s eyes to bottom of page
  Endnotes            Don’t distract readers                                Hide research at end of paper where few readers look
  In-text citations   Don’t distract readers, integrate sources with text   Add extra words to text, can sound clumsy or forced
  ------------------- ----------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------

The choice is yours, but here are my recommendations:

[check.png] Use footnotes if you have strong research from sources you
want to highlight and an audience used to slightly formal white papers.

[check.png] Use endnotes if you have weaker sources or so many that you
don’t want to distract readers from the flow.

[check.png] Use in-text citations if you have only a few sources and
don’t think your readers want to look at references.

[check.png] If you can’t decide, choose the least intrusive approach,
endnotes.

The immediacy of footnotes

Footnotes provide additional information at the bottom of a page, linked
with a superscript number in the text, like the one at the end of this
sentence. Footnotes convey a more academic or formal tone to a white
paper and suggest how much research has gone into it. In a white paper,
most footnotes give the source for a quote, fact, or number in the text.
You seldom see any running commentary on the text, as in some textbooks
or academic journals.

Footnotes are quite appropriate for the most research-based flavor of
white paper, the problem/solution; they’re somewhat useful for a
backgrounder that includes any claims from third parties about the
benefits of an offering; and they’re not at all useful for a numbered
list, where the emphasis is on provocative ideas, not scholarship.

[tip.eps] If you started off using bottom-of-the-page footnotes but want
to see how they’d work as end-of-the-document endnotes, you can convert
them all in one fell swoop with Word. On the References tab, in the
Footnotes group, click the Footnote and Endnote Dialog Box Launcher (the
little arrow in the corner). When that box appears, select Endnotes and
then click Convert. Then in the Convert Notes dialog box, select Convert
All Footnotes to Endnotes and click OK. You can change them all back by
using a similar process but clicking Convert All Endnotes to Footnotes.

The finality of endnotes

Because endnotes are gathered together at the end of a white paper,
they’re much less evident than bottom-of-the-page footnotes. Although
endnotes are less intrusive, they also hide away the research that went
into a white paper. Fewer readers will look at the last page of a white
paper to check a reference.

1. Made you look! See how a footnote can distract you from the flow of
ideas?

In some ways, this makes endnotes the least satisfactory way to handle
your sources.

I recommend using endnotes when you have few sources, when you have so
many sources that every page would be cluttered with footnotes, or when
the offering is affordable and the audience is owners of small- to
medium-sized businesses, who probably don’t care how the references
look. And when it’s a tossup between approaches, I say go with endnotes,
the least objectionable of all. You can let Word place all your endnotes
on the very last page of your white paper, under a major heading like
“Notes” or “References.”

[tip.eps] You don’t have to live with that annoying rule that Word
inserts at the top of your endnotes by default. To get rid of it, go to
the View tab and select Draft. Then go to the References tab and select
Show Notes. From the pull-down menu in the top border of the Endnotes
pane, select Endnote Separator. Select the rule and click Delete to
erase it. Then use the View tab to go back to the view you normally use.
Presto! One less annoying rule getting in your way.

The tidiness of in-text citations

Magazines and newspapers don’t use footnotes. Every quote and statistic
is sourced with an in-text reference, something like this: “Footnotes
and endnotes are soooo old-fashioned,” declared copywriter Ima Writer in
her March 2013 column in White Papers Today. “All the cool kids today
are using in-text citations.” See how smooth this type of citation can
be? And you can pick up any magazine to see just how journalists do it.

The nice thing about in-text citations is that they’re so tidy. You
don’t have to look anywhere else on the page or in the document: The
whole reference is in one spot. The only downside is that these
citations take more words, and if you’re not careful, they can lead to
some clunky-sounding sentences.

But in-text citations can deliver the best of both worlds: Like a
footnote, the whole reference is on the same page, but like an endnote,
it doesn’t disrupt your reading experience. This approach may be better
for a backgrounder or numbered list, where you’re not trying to showcase
your research but rather describe an offering or be provocative. In a
problem/solution, you may prefer to use footnotes to highlight all the
research that went into your white paper.

Formatting citations

The two main systems for formatting footnotes in academic papers are APA
and MLA. And just for good measure, there’s a third system from the
Chicago Manual of Style (University of Chicago). Although academics may
battle to the death over which system is better, it really doesn’t
matter which one you use in any white paper.

Most business people have forgotten everything they ever knew about
footnotes since their college days. The key is to pick one format and
stick to it within any white paper and ideally across all white papers
from the same company. I’ve never had a client say a word about how I
formatted a single citation in any white paper. To be honest, they were
probably amazed and pleased to see any references in there!

Microsoft Word provides some built-in tools for organizing sources and
formatting citations in your chosen style. These tools are clearly a big
help for writing essays. But I don’t know a single business writer who
uses them. I didn’t even know they were there until I was poking around
to write this chapter. And, let’s face it, for six or eight references
in a white paper, you don’t need power tools. If you want to explore
these features — and now that I found them, I probably will — look at
Citations & Bibliography under the References tab.

[tip.eps] If you really want to understand how to follow a specific
style for your footnotes, websites for college writing centers often
have this kind of information. The Purdue Online Writing Lab
(http://owl.english.purdue.edu) is a handy resource used by people
around the world. And Research Papers For Dummies (Wiley) provides a
good discussion of the main three citation styles.

OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 15

Write Like a Journalist

In This Chapter

[arrow] Reading white papers and other nonfiction

[arrow] Mastering writing techniques, from bullets to white space

[arrow] Rewriting with some unexpected help from your computer

[arrow] Using and developing style guides

[arrow] Improving your writing process

After you dig up a mountain of evidence to prove your case, as described
in Chapter 14, the next step is to shape all that info into a clear,
factual, and engaging white paper. My advice, after doing this close to
200 times, is to write like an old-fashioned journalist who’s interested
in “just the facts, ma’am.”

Old-fashioned journalists knew their readers didn’t have any patience
for fancy-pants language, so they made every paragraph crystal clear.
Their editors grilled them about their sources and double-checked all
the particulars, so they stuck to the facts. But their readers had a lot
of distractions — the boss, the spouse, the kids, the game on TV — so
those journalists found a way to make every story engaging. And they had
a deadline to hit, so they wrote fast.

As a white paper writer today, you need to do all of that, plus more.
Your audience is even tougher, and more is at stake, namely millions of
dollars in revenue for your client. So your white paper needs to be even
more precise, more logical, and more compelling than anything your
readers ever saw in a newspaper. That’s a tall order, but this chapter
can help you meet it.

In this chapter, I focus on five key tasks for any white paper writer:

[check.png] Reading many other white papers and any nonfiction that
stimulates and inspires you, and keeping your own “swipe file” of
notable ideas

[check.png] Writing every day, any type of B2B material but especially
any white papers you have a chance to work on

[check.png] Rewriting to polish drafts, with help from your computer to
read back your drafts and show objective statistics on your writing

[check.png] Learning from style guides, following house style, and
creating your own style guide

[check.png] Refining your writing process with best practices and fresh
ideas that can bring out your top efforts

This isn’t a step-by-step process; you’ll likely jump back and forth
between these tasks and spend time on several of them during any given
day. Each task supports and reinforces all the others and helps your
skills and confidence grow.

Don’t try to absorb everything in this chapter in one go. This chapter
is so dense with tips that you may want to flip back to it for a little
guidance and inspiration when you’re working on your next white paper.
With practice, you can do this; you can write even better than an
old-time journalist.

Reading for Fun and Profit

Writers tend to read, almost compulsively. For example, if nothing else
is close by, do you find yourself reading the cereal box during
breakfast? That’s a dead giveaway. To help you master the white paper
format, you should be reading every white paper your own company or
client has available, a steady stream of white papers from outside
sources, and any new research or thinking related to white papers from
respected researchers and bloggers.

On top of that, make time every week to read nonfiction books,
magazines, and websites that inspire you. In the following sections, I
explore the benefits of all this reading, and I introduce a way to keep
track of all the best nuggets you find.

Reading white papers

To truly understand the white paper format and the countless
possibilities of these documents, you must read lots of them. How many
is enough? Well, most days of the week, I download and scan at least one
white paper. That’s close to 250 a year. And when I’m actively
researching a white paper, I can easily look at five to ten of these
documents in a day. That means I likely study more than 500 white papers
a year, and I’ve been doing that for well over ten years. That’s
certainly enough to see the ongoing trends and evaluate which ones seem
more effective than others and why.

[tip.eps] As you look at a white paper that someone else prepared, ask
yourself these questions:

[check.png] Who is this white paper aimed at? Where do they likely sit
in the sales funnel?

[check.png] What flavor is this: a backgrounder, numbered list, or
problem/solution?

[check.png] If I were a target reader, would this persuade me to take
action?

[check.png] What questions do I have about this topic? Does this answer
them?

[check.png] How is this white paper structured? What elements are
present? Which ones are missing?

[check.png] What about the design? Graphics? Does every white paper from
this company follow the same template?

[check.png] What overall impression of the company does this give me?

Whether you work in-house or you’re a contract writer who just landed a
new client, you must read every white paper the company has available.
If the company is a major B2B vendor like Hewlett-Packard or Microsoft
with hundreds of white papers, that’s going to be a big challenge. The
good news is that most of those white papers are likely backgrounders,
so you can sample eight or ten to get a good idea what the company
publishes. If the company is smaller and has only half a dozen or so
white papers, take one or two hours to look at every one.

Besides being familiar with your company or client’s white papers, you
should look at any produced by direct competitors. Your B2B buyers are
probably looking at white papers from those competitors, so you should
know what they offer. Download as many as you can and go through them
carefully, asking yourself the questions listed earlier in this section.
Find their weak spots. Now answer this: How are you going to outdo them?
How are you going to create a white paper that’s more clear, more
effective, and more persuasive than anything those competitors have
done? If you can’t, why bother publishing anything at all?

Reading related research

You should keep up with any reports that touch on white papers,
especially any driven by research or significant-sized surveys of 1,000
or more people. Some likely sources include Content Marketing Institute,
Eccolo Media, MarketingProfs, MarketingSherpa, and TechTarget. And you
should be aware of the ongoing discussions on the handful of blogs that
cover B2B content marketing in general and white papers specifically. My
own site, ThatWhitePaperGuy.com, offers new articles every month, born
from my hands-on experience or sparked by some question I received.

You probably don’t need to set up a Google Alert or search the
Twitterverse for “white paper”; doing so will turn up more white papers
than you can ever look at. However, do run a Google search once a month,
and look at the more interesting links to keep up-to-date in the field.

Reading for inspiration

Find some authors who inspire you. I’m not talking about Jane Austen or
William Gibson; novels count as reading for pleasure. I’m talking about
any nonfiction writers who deal with business, history, science,
sociology, technology, or travel. For example, Malcolm Gladwell is an
especially engaging writer who does both magazine articles and books
about a stimulating range of topics.

Magazines certainly count as reading, but be strategic in your choices.
Read material that challenges your beliefs and understanding. Science
magazines are great for writers with an arts background; artsy or
political magazines are useful for writers from the sciences. Also, see
what kinds of things interest other people: Men, read some women’s
magazines, and women, read some men’s magazines. If you’re a Republican,
read material written for liberals; if you’re a Democrat, read material
for conservatives. See how people with different views structure their
arguments and introduce their proof points.

Websites count, too, especially those devoted to the arts, science, men,
women, liberals, or conservatives, as previously noted. You may want to
read websites aimed at the typical audiences you write for, such as
CFOs, CIOs, security chiefs, government agency directors, small-business
owners/managers, and so on. Any sizeable segment of the B2B audience has
one or more associations, forums, and websites devoted to it.

Keeping a “swipe file”

A swipe file is a personal collection of words, phrases, ideas, and
graphics that you want to remember. Keeping a swipe file is a
tried-and-true practice most copywriters use to build their knowledge
and get quick inspiration when they need it. To get started, you can
even download a free swipe file here:
www.freelancewriting.com/ebooks/ebook-copywriters-swipe-files.php. No
one has yet put together a downloadable swipe file for white papers, but
that could happen.

Why bother keeping a swipe file? It helps you store inspiring examples
of white papers and their elements for future reference. Then you can
share an example or two with a client or designer to show them some
possibilities. A swipe file can be especially helpful early in your
white paper writing career.

To organize your swipe file of white papers, you may want a section for
each flavor plus sections for good covers, nice tables, eye-catching
pull quotes, effective sidebars, excellent graphics, and anything else
that may inspire you in the future. So how can you store a swipe file?
Table 15-1 shows five possible methods with the pros and cons of each. I
combine two methods, saving an entire PDF and printing only selected
pages to file in a binder of ideas. You may prefer to keep your swipe
file with the help of a software tool like Evernote that can store web
links or PDFs and sync to all your devices.

[Five Ways to Store a Swipe File]

Keeping a swipe file isn’t stealing; it’s research. After all, you can’t
copyright a white paper heading or a title. This is one case where
imitation is the most sincere form of flattery — as long as you don’t
plagiarize a whole chunk of a text from a direct competitor. That’s a
definite no-no. If the client ever discovered you did that, you likely
wouldn’t get any repeat business.

Writing Winning White Papers

Coaches are always telling their players to work on their fundamentals.
Practicing the basic skills of an activity can certainly improve your
performance. That’s why every day, you should look for ways to practice
writing any type of B2B material: e-mails, press releases, web pages,
and so on. The sheer process of putting out words aimed at B2B buyers
will build your experience and confidence. And try to wangle a chance to
work on a white paper as often as you can.

In this section, I discuss several fundamental B2B writing skills you
need to practice until you master each one. If you can do all of them,
you’ll have what it takes to write winning white papers:

[check.png] Getting to the point with as few words as possible

[check.png] Handling dialogue and sources gracefully

[check.png] Creating text enhancements

[check.png] Writing for translation

[check.png] Choosing one metaphor and sticking with it

[check.png] Controlling your material

Getting to the point

Brevity is highly valued in B2B writing for English-speaking audiences.
Just as every event in a story must further the plot, every paragraph in
your white paper must further your argument. Your goal is to deliver a
compelling message in the fewest possible words. In a nutshell, get to
the point.

You need to write crisp, clear, compelling text that persuades readers
of your views and persuades them to take action. The best way to do that
is to not waste words. Remember that old-fashioned journalist? Ernest
Hemingway did some journalism in his time. Of course, he’s remembered
more for his acclaimed short stories and novels, and he won the Nobel
prize for literature in 1954. His prose style is as lean and spare and
economical as you’ll ever find. To succeed in white papers, you need to
write more like Hemingway than like some business people who never use
one word when they can use five.

[tip.eps] Before you write, sketch out your argument in brief; this
outline can become the first draft of your executive summary (see
Chapter 12 for more on creating an executive summary). To get started,
set up a subhead for every major point of the white paper’s argument.
That framework can help you give proper emphasis to each point and make
sure you don’t forget anything. After that, getting to the point can be
simple. Ask yourself, “What am I trying to say in this sentence? This
paragraph?” Then say it, clearly and crisply.

Handling dialogue and sources

Newspaper and magazine stories are built around quotes, so journalists
get a lot of practice and figure out how to handle sources gracefully.
With all the skill of a dramatist, they can introduce their sources at
the right time, usher them into the spotlight, give them a brief
soliloquy, and then usher them gracefully off the stage. But for most
business people, handling quotes from people is weird and unusual.

Quotes are best for providing opinions or for introducing a rhetorical
device, particularly when you have no facts or figures to prove a point.
The most common failings are using quotes that are too long and not
integrated into your argument. When you did your research, you found
likely sources and effective quotes, but you probably didn’t trim them
down to a single sentence. Remember, your prime directive (get to the
point) applies to quotes, too.

For example, say you’re writing about the benefits of automatic filing
for Acme Scanners, and you find this lengthy quote from an executive in
a trade magazine:

“When I think about the many technical problems that still await proper
solutions, my mind always goes to the fact that most corporate teams
suffer tremendous paper burden. Whether or not all those incoming
documents are committed to paper, we’re all getting snowed under,” says
CIO Norman Stewachski of Worldwide Conglomerates. “The seeming magic of
automated scanning, tagging, and filing of incoming e-mail attachments
would save the business world untold billions of dollars.”1 (72 words)

Although the quote has good content, it sounds a little flabby. Here’s
one way to trim it in half but still use it as a direct quotation:

“Most corporate teams suffer from tremendous paper burden,” says CIO
Norman Stewachski of Worldwide Conglomerates. “The seeming magic of
automated scanning, tagging, and filing of incoming e-mail attachments
would save the business world untold billions of dollars.”1 (36 words)

This revision is shorter but still not ideal. Some journalists recommend
not to use quotes to give fresh information; instead, use quotes only to
show reactions to facts you already stated, keeping you in control of
the narrative. Otherwise, you’re passing the microphone to an outside
source to make your argument.

Another powerful way to use this quote is to paraphrase (restate without
distortion) some of it and quote the key part gracefully in the same
paragraph:

Executives agree that most corporate teams suffer from paper burden. One
promising solution is to automatically scan, tag, and file incoming
e-mail attachments. This technology, notes CIO Norman Stewachski of
Worldwide Conglomerates, “would save the business world untold billions
of dollars.”1 (39 words)

Notice the footnote symbol (1) in each example. Even if you paraphrase a
quotation, you should still include a citation to boost the authority of
this proof point. If you don’t want to use a footnote, you can include a
few extra words to make an in-text citation:

Executives agree that most corporate teams suffer from paper burden. One
promising solution is to automatically scan, tag, and file incoming
e-mail attachments. CIO Norman Stewachski of Worldwide Conglomerate
noted in the May 2013 issue of CIO World that this technology “would
save the business world untold billions of dollars.” (49 words)

As you can see, you can use any one of these ways to tighten up a
lengthy quote and integrate it into your argument: direct quotation,
partial quotation, or paraphrasing. With practice, you can master the
art of compressing a source into fewer words without distorting the
meaning and gain the confidence to make sure you’re the one making your
argument, not your sources.

Creating text enhancements

Doing a white paper challenges a writer to think about more than words.
You need to visualize how the finished document will look on the page or
screen and how you can help it look more inviting, easier to scan, and
quicker to read. Simply writing a mass of words and handing them off to
a designer isn’t a recipe for success. Instead, as you write and revise,
look for any opportunity to save words by using a table, graphic, or any
other device to break up your paragraphs.

Text enhancements include anything you can type that breaks up a solid
wall of text — bullets, headings, pull quotes, sidebars, tables, or
white space. These elements are all free and built into Word and any
other word processor. You just have to remember to use them. The
following sections provide a few notes and tips on using each type of
text enhancement, from bullets to white space.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Imposing order on your bullet points

Eye-tracking research has revealed that most people scan through bullets
in an unexpected way. They focus on the first point and usually the
second and then skip down to the last, often failing to take in any
bullets in the middle.

What does this mean for white papers? Well, most writers instinctively
arrange a bulleted list by priority, with the most important point
first, then the second, and so on down to the least important at the
end.

But knowing how most readers scan lists, you probably want to arrange
your bulleted lists like this:

[check.png] Strongest point

[check.png] Second strongest point

[check.png] Weaker point

[check.png] Weaker point

[check.png] Third strongest point

The first few times you reorder a list this way, the organization will
probably feel a little strange. But if much of your audience will scan
through your white paper on the screen, this approach should add more
impact to your bulleted lists. (For more tips on how to use lists, see
Chapter 10.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[remember.eps] Every page of a white paper should have at least one
visual break from straight text, either a graphic or a text enhancement.
But use these visual elements wisely: Having too many of them on the
same page can create another problem because every element fights for
attention against all the rest.

Some of these text enhancements cross over into the world of design. For
hints on designing white papers, flip to Chapter 18.

Bullets and lists

Whenever you have a list of items, consider making it a bulleted list.
Even two items is enough for bullets, especially if that page has no
other enhancements. This book uses bulleted lists frequently, such as
the following, to set text apart. Here are a couple of tips for bulleted
lists:

[check.png] Punctuate your bullet text consistently. Most style guides
recommend no punctuation unless each item forms a complete sentence.

[check.png] Express each point in parallel structure, using the same
grammatical form. Doing so makes your bullets faster to scan and easier
to understand.

The standard bullet characters are a filled-in dot (●) or a square (■)
in black or the same color as the associated text. If you choose a
nonstandard character for your bullets — something like ▶, [smile], or Ω
— or print them in a different color from the text, that will give your
reader pause. Is that really what you want? Or do you want them to scan
down your list as a welcome relief for their eyes?

[warning_bomb.eps] You can overuse bullets. For example, bullets within
bullets within bullets are rarely attractive. And a full page of
bullets, or a set of bullets with large chunks of text after every one,
loses the main benefit of bullets: to provide a welcome change. Instead
of simplifying the text, using bullets in these ways adds visual and
conceptual clutter to your white paper.

Headings

Every white paper needs a set of major and minor headings. You can call
them “heads” and “subheads”; Word calls them Heading 1 and Heading 2.
Two levels are enough for most white papers; you want three at the most
(in this case, use Word’s Heading 3). Every heading doesn’t have to be
parallel — that is, written with a consistent structure and phrasing.
And you don’t want to use any cutesy puns that no one can figure out;
doing so defeats the purpose of a heading — to describe what a given
section covers.

Here are a few hints about writing headings for the three flavors of
white papers:

[check.png] For a backgrounder, the offering’s major features and
benefits can provide most of your headings.

[check.png] For a numbered list, the main points of your list
automatically form the major headings.

[check.png] For a problem/solution, each discrete part of the white
paper can fall under a major heading, including the problem, existing
solutions and drawbacks, new improved solution, buyer’s guide, and
conclusions. I often try to write all these headings as a continuous
story, giving a reader who scans through the white paper a quick idea of
the argument.

Pull quotes

A pull quote is a short phrase or sentence pulled out of the text on
that page and presented in larger letters, often in a solid block of
color. Not all white papers use pull quotes, but more should. With just
a glance, the eyes of even the most casual reader will fall on a pull
quote and absorb it. Look in any magazine to see how pull quotes are
used to break up a page that’s mostly text.

Keep the following in mind when using pull quotes:

[check.png] You don’t have to use the text exactly as it’s shown in your
white paper; it’s okay to drop a few words.

[check.png] You don’t want to go beyond 20 words in a pull quote; fewer
is better.

[check.png] You don’t have to make a complete sentence or use a period
at the end of a pull quote.

For example, suppose a key sentence in your white paper goes like this:

Worse, suppressing printed statements has a hidden downside: It can
damage longstanding customer relationships, generate negative PR, and
even hurt revenues if annoyed customers switch suppliers.

The following would be an acceptable pull quote for that page:

Suppressing printed statements can damage customer relationships,
generate negative PR, and even hurt revenues

A shorter and punchier version would work even better:

Suppressing printed statements can hurt revenues

You can show your designer that you want them to format a piece of text
as a pull quote by typing it in a larger point size, identified as “pull
quote.” You may have to adjust the pull quotes or write new ones when
the pages are designed, because the text should come from the page where
the pull quote appears.

Sidebars

A sidebar is a separate chunk of text spun off from the main body and
presented differently, perhaps in a tinted box or a different typeface.
This book includes sidebars for content that’s slightly more detailed or
outside the main thread of a discussion. To set the text apart from the
rest of the chapter, For Dummies sidebars are set in shaded text boxes.

Tables

Tables are an excellent way to sum up a lot of information, use fewer
words, and add visual interest. A table is essentially a list with more
than one dimension, yielding a two-dimensional grid with vertical
columns and horizontal rows.

How do you know when you need a table? Sometimes the call for a table is
obvious, like when you want to present a set of numbers, and writing
several sentences to show the relationship between them would be clumsy.
Another likely time for a table is to compare a set of products,
choices, or alternatives. For clarity, orient the table to present the
information in the most logical and accessible way. Some tables make
more sense turned one way or the other. For example, the tables in
Chapters 12 and 13 show the steps for creating a white paper, which seem
more natural with the tasks arranged as a horizontal to-do list.

Other tables work equally well either way. For example, any table with
about the same number of rows and columns often makes as much sense
turned either way. Sometimes how you orient a table is a question of
space on the page. Consider a table with many vertical columns but few
horizontal rows, which quickly runs off the width of a page. In that
case, either turn the whole page on its side — which is always a bit
awkward — or redo the table with the rows turned into columns and see
how it fits that way.

To format tables, check with your designer for ideas, look for good
models in your swipe file, or try the formats built into Word. After you
insert a table into Word, check out the Design tab under Table Tools.

White space

I’m always amazed when I see a white paper where the text runs 100 or
120 characters wide. This makes it so hard on the reader’s eyes that no
one will ever get through that document. A recommended measure for easy
white paper reading is 60 characters at most. Three-column magazines
have text lines around 40 characters wide, and newspaper columns are
even narrower.

[tip.eps] For a white paper, I recommend setting your page margins to at
least 1.25 inches all around. And I like to leave a wider margin on the
left, like 2.0 or 2.5 inches for white space where a designer can place
pull quotes and graphics.

Another simple way to get more white space is to create another
paragraph every few lines. Whoever said that you could have only one or
two paragraphs per page in a white paper? Of all the text enhancements
you can use, breaking the text into more paragraphs is the simplest of
all.

Writing for translation

Will your white paper be circulated in different languages? Here are a
few tips to make your text easier for a translator to work with and cut
the risk of any international incidents.

[check.png] Avoid vague adjectives. Adjectives such as long, quick,
large, or expensive are vague and may have different meanings for people
in different places. For example, a long-term project can mean anything
from a 6-month project to a 30-year project. In any language, it’s
better to get down to specifics by using numbers rather than adjectives.

[check.png] Avoid local references. Local references are allusions to
anything unknown in other countries, including people, places,
activities, food, and holidays. Don’t assume a global audience knows
what you mean when you touch on any of these references. For example,
most people in the world have no idea how to play baseball. Any
references inspired by the sport, such as ballpark figure or swinging
for the bleachers, will just confuse people. For Canadians, hockey
phrases like power play or breakaway are similar no-nos. And for anyone
from a Commonwealth country, cricket phrases like carry your bat or
grubber are meaningless to people from most other countries.

[check.png] Avoid idioms. By the same token, avoid colorful idioms or
metaphors that people take for granted in North America. Phrases like
The Big Apple or Marketing 101 won’t mean much to a reader from another
culture. If you include phrases like these and a translator renders them
directly into another language, they’ll likely be meaningless. And if a
translator looks for another idiom to replace yours, he may miss the
bull’s eye or upset the apple cart. And then your carefully written
white paper may be up the creek on thin ice, er, without a paddle.

[check.png] Avoid contractions. In English, contractions like don’t and
we’ll help sentences sound more conversational. But they’re nothing but
trouble for translators because they hide letters, mask tenses, and
create uncertainty. It’s better to avoid contractions altogether when
writing for translation.

[check.png] Use short sentences. Use shorter, simpler sentences than you
would if you were writing for native speakers. Shorter sentences are
easier for everyone to handle anyway, including native readers. If you
write the opposite way, creating long, complex, roundabout, run-on
sentences with multiple phrases all piled up on top of one another like
some sort of train wreck; well, you can see how they can be harder to
understand and tougher to translate, can’t you?

Choosing one metaphor and sticking with it

Rich imagery helps writing come alive. A metaphor is a rhetorical device
that links two different things together, such as an abstract concept
and a physical object, or two items from different domains with one
similar quality. This link can paint a vivid word picture in a reader’s
mind. But you must control your imagery, or your argument can sound
scatterbrained. Consider this ill-formed sentence:

He has a lot of black sheep in his closet.

Ridiculous, right? That mixed metaphor starts off with one image but
ends with another. That’s a sign of an inexperienced or lazy writer.
It’s jarring, doesn’t hang together, and sounds like a first draft
nobody bothered to fix.

A classic mixed metaphor occurs within a single sentence. These
statements blast off like a rocket to Mars, lose their way in the dark
woods, and end up at the corner of Non and Sense. And you can have
mixed-up, muddled-up, shook-up metaphors within the same paragraph,
section, or document. What’s the alternative? You can deliberately
choose and use one unified set of images throughout a white paper to
create a more powerful impression of a thoughtful, well-considered
document.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[truestory_property.eps] Hitting a home run with a unified metaphor

I once wrote a white paper on how e-commerce websites need to meet three
main challenges: security, availability, and scalability. I came up with
the image of a triple-threat baseball player, that rare talent who’s
equally good at hitting, running, and fielding. Then I jotted down all
the baseball terms I could think of in a couple minutes: home run,
strikeout, bottom of the ninth, World Series, foul ball, pennant, in the
strike zone, umpire, pop fly, bleachers, and more. That created a word
list to draw on for my first draft.

I introduced the metaphor in the first two sentences of the white paper:

To be effective, your e-commerce website must meet three critical
requirements — security, availability, and scalability — just like a
baseball player who can run, hit, and field. And it’s not enough to do
one or two well; a star performer has to be a triple-threat who excels
at all three.

Then whenever I wanted a metaphor for the body of the paper, I looked
back at my baseball word list; that always gave me a term or sparked
another idea. I never had to search for an image or pull it together
during the rewrite. In the conclusions section, I went back to that
imagery and mentioned winning the World Series. That white paper hit it
out of the park!

(Please note that this image worked well for the target audience: 90
percent men, all in the United States. For a mixed audience of men and
women around the world, I wouldn’t choose that kind of sports image.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

My best advice here is to ring the bell — touch on the same image —
three times: once at the start, once at the end, and at least once in
the middle. To apply this rule, introduce a metaphor in the first
sentence or two of your white paper. Return to the same image at the
end, giving it a twist that adds a sense of completion. And touch on it
at least once more in the main body of the paper instead of flying off
in some other direction. Handling your metaphors this well takes
practice and effort. But why use random imagery when you can pull it all
together as a unified message?

[tip.eps] You can even make these metaphors the first things you write.
Try this tip at the start of your writing session: Come up with a
“master metaphor” to tie everything together, and then jot down all the
terms you can think of from the same domain. From then on, whenever you
need a metaphor, draw it from your word list. This step doesn’t eat up
time; in fact, I believe it actually saves time, both in writing and
rewriting.

Controlling your material

The single most important thing you must do as a white paper writer is
to control your material. Otherwise, it will control you. Here are two
quick questions to check who’s in charge:

[check.png] When you start to write a white paper, do you wonder what
the heck to do first? If so, you probably realize that you’re no pro at
writing white papers and you should get more familiar with them. Knowing
what to include and what to leave out, how to find and trim down a
quotation, and how to build a persuasive argument seems almost
impossible. In other words, it’s probably difficult for you to control
your material. Don’t worry. This book can help, and more practice will
build your knowledge and confidence. You’ll likely make mistakes, but
you’ll benefit from them.

[check.png] Do you feel like it takes all your effort just to get a
white paper drafted, let alone thinking about anything like ringing the
bell (see previous section)? If so, you can control your material but
just barely. Again, more practice will help you write these documents
with less strain and master more advanced techniques until you’re firmly
in control.

Only a handful of writers ever reach the pinnacle of white paper
writing, where the process comes easily, almost without any conscious
thinking or planning. These folks are considered professional white
paper writers; they can control their material, ring the bell, handle
sources smoothly, and build a persuasive argument from a mix of facts,
figures, opinions, and rhetoric. For example, only 8 percent of nearly
600 respondents from a survey of white papers writers were rated “highly
experienced” because they’d written more than 40 white papers. I
personally worked on 30 white papers before one turned out so well that
I still use it as a sample. Controlling your material is partly a matter
of learning but mainly a matter of practice.

How will you know when you’ve mastered the art of writing white papers?
Well, writing always takes effort. But after you reach mastery, you no
longer have to struggle just to get your ideas down; you do that much
faster and give them more shape and form with more decisiveness. You
know some things intuitively, like where to insert a quote or factoid or
when to move on to your next point.

A big part of controlling your material is knowing what not to do, how
to avoid the mistakes you made in the past. Gradually, you discover how
to rewrite so that each draft gets stronger, more concise, and more
persuasive. And if your client asks you to tweak the tone to make it
“more businesslike” or the opposite (“more conversational”), you can do
that in one confident pass through your draft instead of dissolving into
a quivering mass of jelly.

Rewriting Before You Submit

Get me rewrite! Old-time journalists knew the value of a rewrite. That
was when the copy desk editors tightened, checked, and cleaned up their
drafts to get them ready to print. Sometimes they even bounced a draft
back to the reporter for a rewrite.

That still happens often on glossy magazines. And that’s not a bad
thing. Personally, I believe that writing is rewriting. And so do many
other seasoned writers. A first draft is only a starting point. If you
know what to do, you can improve any draft with some careful rewriting.
You can base a rewrite on comments from reviewers, statistical analysis
of your text, or your own growing judgment about what can be improved.

With all that going for it, who wouldn’t rewrite? Well, beginning
writers — those who aren’t in control of their material (see the
preceding section) — can be so exhausted simply typing up a first draft
that they just want to get it off their desk. Sometimes they don’t even
reread their draft before they send it off to their client. I’m not sure
what they expect will happen. Will the client magically know how to find
and fix all the deficiencies? Not likely. Clients aren’t professional
editors with years of experience detecting flaws in a text, articulating
the problems, and suggesting ways to fix them. Instead, reviewers will
more likely give comments like “needs more details” or “too wordy” that
leave inexperienced writers shaking their head in bewilderment, not sure
what to do next. But you can avoid all of this by doing a proper rewrite
or two before you show anything to your client.

In the following sections, I discuss these best practices that can make
your rewrites more effective:

[check.png] Avoiding throat-clearing

[check.png] Having your computer read back your draft to you

[check.png] Getting readability statistics on your text

[check.png] Changing passive voice to active voice

More white paper writers should follow these practices. They work,
they’re free, and they help create a superior white paper for your
client.

Avoiding throat-clearing

One common failing to look for is a rambling introduction that takes up
a couple of paragraphs without saying anything much. Called authorial
throat-clearing, this is a remnant of you warming up during your first
writing session. In the old days, it was the start of a business letter
saying, “It has come to my attention that . . .” In a white paper, it’s
likely a few sentences like the following:

In today’s uncertain economy, companies must try to stretch their
resources as far as possible. Doing more with less is today’s mantra at
all levels of the enterprise. That’s why more and more companies are now
considering moving part of their IT to the cloud. . . .

Often these sentiments are so obvious that you can easily cut them. What
company doesn’t want to stretch its resources? But some writers dearly
love to retain this deadwood, feeling it makes an effective
introduction. It doesn’t. Cut it on your rewrite, and tell readers
something they haven’t heard before.

Having your computer read your draft

Hearing a draft of your white paper read out loud shows you all the
rough edges that could use a polish. It also enables you to concentrate
on the flow of the words and the power of the rhetoric. Whenever I do
this, I’m alerted to little fix-ups that can make the phrasing smoother,
the sentences crisper, and the effect more persuasive. Text-to-speech is
already built into your PC or Mac with alternate apps available as free
downloads. Sure, the voices sound a little robotic, but it’s still a
quick and easy way to help polish up a draft.

I had my Windows PC read me back most of this book, one paragraph at a
time, so I could hear where I needed to polish it. Windows has the
Narrator utility built in, but I find it clunky; it's really designed as
a screen reader for the visually impaired. Instead, I used
NaturalReader, a free download from www.naturalreaders.com. You can set
up NaturalReader as a floating toolbar in Word, so all you do is select
text and click Play to read it back.

Like many things on the Mac, a text reader is already built in, and it
works very smoothly. You can select a different voice or adjust the
narrator's speed by opening System Preferences and clicking Speech and
the Text-To-Speech panel. Using this utility is dirt simple: Open your
white paper file on your screen, highlight the text you want to read,
and press Ctrl + T. You can also try the NaturalReader Mac download from
www.naturalreaders.com, which gives you a floating toolbar with voice
controls you can access from any application without having to go into
System Preferences.

Getting readability statistics on your text

Writing is subjective, so who’s to say whether something is really clear
or well written? It’s all a judgment call, right? Well, yes and no.
Several formulas have been developed to give people some sense of the
readability of a passage. These formulas can’t evaluate whether your
sentences make sense or your tone is appropriate for your current white
paper, but they can give you an idea about how easy it is to read your
draft. And the good news is, the most popular ones are already built
into Word ready for you to use.

[tip.eps] Two simple techniques can improve your writing’s readability
scores: Use shorter words, and use shorter sentences. Using more
paragraphs helps, too. In other words, you can make your white paper
text easier to read by using three keys: Backspace to delete long words,
period (.) to break up long sentences, and Enter to break up long
paragraphs.

Readability stats built into Word

Did you know that a perfectly good readability checker is built into
Word? It’s turned off by default because not everyone wants to bother
with it, but you can easily turn it on and use it to help you measure
your writing. This readability check runs quickly right after any
spell-check and gives you numerous statistics about your current file.

To turn on readability statistics, follow these steps:

 1. Select File (Word 2010) or the Office button (Word 2007) and choose
Word Options and then Proofing.

2. Select Check Grammar With Spelling and Show Readability Statistics.

To see readability stats, select Spelling & Grammar on the Review tab.

The readability statistics appear in a small window after the spelling
and grammar check runs. Figure 15-1 shows two sample windows with the
actual results from two drafts of the same white paper.

[9781118496923-fg1501.eps]

Illustration courtesy of Gordon Graham

Figure 15-1: White paper readability, before (left) and after revision
(right).

White paper readability, before and after revision

A client came to me with a draft white paper that most reviewers thought
was too hard for their target audience to read. So I revised it,
capturing Word’s readability stats from before and after. As shown in
Figure 15-1, the original scores are on the left and my revision’s
scores on the right.

Under Counts, notice that the total word count didn’t change much: down
by less than 2 percent. But the number of paragraphs and sentences shot
up as I radically shortened them. Under Averages, note how the average
number of words per sentence fell dramatically from 27.2 to 17.3. And
under Readability, see how that paid off: the Flesch Reading Ease
improved by more than a third (the higher the number here, the better),
and the Flesch-Kincaid Grade Level was lowered from college to
high-school reading level (the lower the number here, the better). The
reviewers said my revision was perfect for their audience.

Statistics are one thing, but looking at some actual sentences shows how
I boosted the readability. Here’s some original text:

Acme’s experience indicates that higher-priced RTB impressions, where
our models indicate a higher expected influence in driving advertisers’
goals, were up to 100 times more effective in influencing consumer
behavior than lower-priced ones, a pattern that persists across
industries, customers and campaigns. This implies that counter to
conventional wisdom, in an RTB world, rather than creating value for the
advertiser, a media buyer focused too intently on CPM may actually erode
it. (71 words in 2 sentences)

And here’s how I revised that:

Acme has found that paying more for a higher-quality impression through
RTB can be up to 100 times more effective at influencing consumer
behavior. This pattern applies across industries, customers, and
campaigns. This means that in today’s real-time advertising world,
focusing too much on CPM can actually limit an advertiser’s results. (50
words in 3 sentences)

You can figure out how to do this, too, if you focus some energy on
rewriting.

Changing passive voice to active voice

Notice something else in the readability stats from Figure 15-1: a
measure for Passive Sentences (the lower the score here, the better). In
the rewrite I describe in the previous section, I squeezed that number
down by one-third, from 20 percent to 14 percent, about the same as most
magazines and newspapers. You’ve probably heard of the passive voice,
but not every writer knows exactly what it is, why it’s considered poor
style, or what to do about it. This section answers those three
questions.

Passive voice is a sentence that uses some form of “to be” or “to get”
plus another verb and usually drops the object of the action. This
sounds complicated, but it really isn’t. A few examples prove that
everyone who speaks English uses passive voice every day:

Any attached file is scanned automatically.

The package got delivered late.

That white paper was not promoted properly by the agency.

Passive constructions are considered weak because they waste words. A
passive sentence in English is roughly 15 percent longer and usually
conveys less information. Passive voice creates roundabout sentences
that often describe an action without naming any actor. My favorite
example is from Ronald Reagan, when he sort of admitted that his
administration had done wrong in the Iran-Contra affair: “Mistakes were
made.” Notice what’s missing? The active way to phrase this sentiment
would be, “We made mistakes” or even “I made mistakes.”

To change the passive voice into the active voice (a sentence that
states who is performing the action), figure out who’s doing what to
whom and then use the basic verb without any form of “to be” or “to
get.” This saves words and improves the readability of your sentences,
as in these examples:

Billions of dollars’ worth of sales are driven by white papers. (passive
voice, 11 words)

White papers drive billions of dollars’ worth of sales. (active voice, 9
words or 18 percent shorter)

That white paper was not promoted properly by the agency. (passive
voice, 10 words)

The agency did not promote that white paper properly.(active voice, 9
words or 10 percent shorter)

Of course, you can’t completely eliminate the passive voice, and every
writer uses it every few sentences. Passive voice is useful when the
object of an action is more important than the actor or when you’re not
sure who the actor really is, as in:

The Acme ScanOMatic 3000 was named “Product of the Year.”

The scanner got unplugged over the holidays.

[tip.eps] If you ever see a high score on the order of 30 percent or 40
percent for Passive Sentences in the readability statistics, you should
recast at least half of them. When you recheck your readability, notice
how many words you shaved off and how much better your scores come out.
Eventually, writing in a more active voice will become second nature to
you.

Writing with Style

Some people think style is a side dish, something you just dip words
into at the table, like dipping fries into ketchup. Or mustard. Or
mayonnaise. Each different dipping sauce gives a different taste
sensation, and that’s what style is all about. That’s a fun image, but I
don’t agree. I think style starts back in the kitchen when you choose
which potatoes to use, how to chop them up, which parts to keep and
which to toss in the compost, and how long to leave them in the fryer —
not to mention what kind of oil to use and how often to change it. In
other words, writing style covers everything: the words you use, the way
you assemble them into sentences, and the way you arrange your sentences
to build your point of view.

“Style is knowing who you are, what you want to say, and not giving a
damn,” said Orson Welles, the history-making actor and director. Without
boldness, you have no style. Without passion, you have no style. Without
a point of view, you have no style. Writing effective white papers takes
boldness, passion, and a distinct point of view. Without those things,
you may as well write a memo on the cost of potatoes.

Good style can mean choosing words with skill, following the guidelines
laid down as an organization’s “house” style, always treating terms
consistently, or all three at once. And besides years of practice, a
great way to gain insight and get better at all three of these elements
of style is to use style guides.

Learning from style guides

If you’re fortunate enough to work in a team with other writers, you can
compare notes on how to solve different writing challenges. But even if
you’re the only writer in your company or the only contract writer in
your town, you can still learn from dozens of writers and editors
working in other organizations. Their best thinking and recommendations
are captured in some excellent style guides.

This section points to my own favorite style guides, arranged in
alphabetical order. You can find more style guides aimed at technology
and longer reviews on my website at
www.thatwhitepaperguy.com/white-paper-articles.html#book-reviews.

How many style guides should white paper writers have on their desks? I
recommend The Elements of Style (Longman) plus one or two more. I have
all the books mentioned here plus more. But having one or two that you
actually use is better than a whole shelf full of style guides you never
look at.

The Associated Press Stylebook

Designed for quick reference by busy newspaper reporters and editors,
The Associated Press Stylebook (www.APstylebook.com) is arranged
alphabetically, with further chapters on sports, business, punctuation,
and media law. Opening my copy to a random page, I find entries for
dot-com, double-click, Down syndrome, and Drambuie: All of which I'd
likely wonder how to spell or hyphenate. The Associated Press Stylebook
isn't the hippest reference around, but if you use it for your house
style, you'll be safely in the mainstream of American journalism, and
your white paper style shouldn't offend anyone.

The Elements of Style

If you don’t have a copy of The Elements of Style (Longman) on your
desk, you’re not a real writer. If you’ve never encountered this little
book, you’re in for a pleasant surprise. It’s short, simple, costs less
than $10, and you don’t even have to read it. Yes, you heard me, you can
just flip through this book for guidance and inspiration when you need
it. Like millions of other writers before you, you’ll find it
instructive.

The Elements of Style has been criticized as old-fashioned, too
prescriptive, and just plain wrong on some fine points of grammar. But
after reviews from hundreds of people, it’s still rated 4.7 out of 5 on
Amazon.com. Maybe you can skip the first part with its rules of usage,
which may be outdated in places, but don’t miss the 11 elementary rules
of composition and the 21 approaches to style. Here’s a tiny sampling:

[check.png] Avoid fancy words.

[check.png] Use the active voice.

[check.png] Use definite, specific, concrete language.

[check.png] Work from a suitable design.

[check.png] Place the emphatic words of a sentence at the end.

With each guideline comes a short, often delightful explanation. For
example, here’s a classic sentence under the timeless advice to “omit
needless words”:

A sentence should contain no unnecessary words, a paragraph no
unnecessary sentences, for the same reason that a drawing should have no
unnecessary lines and a machine no unnecessary parts.

[tip.eps] Buy a copy of this book, highlight it, and open it frequently,
especially if you feel discouraged about your writing. To me, flipping
through The Elements of Style is like a bracing shot of good coffee —
maybe fortified by something stronger — that always gets me reinspired
and back to writing my best.

Wikipedia Manual of Style

In Chapter 14, I warn against using Wikipedia as a source in a white
paper. But that doesn't mean this crowd-sourced encyclopedia has nothing
to offer. In particular, the online Wikipedia Manual of Style is quite
well done. I especially like the section called "Words to watch"
available here:
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Manual_of_Style/Words_to_watch.

This section lists the typical problems that can afflict Wikipedia
entries, including bias, vagueness, euphemisms, and unsupported claims.
All the same problems crop up in white papers, and avoiding them is a
matter of good style. For example, here’s a list of words that Wikipedia
calls “puffery”:

. . . brilliant, celebrated, cutting-edge, eminent, extraordinary,
famous, great, leading, legendary, notable, outstanding, prestigious,
remarkable, renowned, respected, virtuoso, visionary, world-class . . .

I’ve seen just about every one of those terms used in marketing
materials from B2B companies. These words, and all their relations, are
ineffective because they give rise to a simple question: Says who? If
you find yourself using such puffed-up language in a white paper, you’ve
fallen into marketing speak. Delete it, and then go back and prove the
claim you’re trying to make.

The Wikipedia style manual also calls out unsupported attributions:

. . . experts declare, it is believed, it is often reported, it is
widely thought, many are of the opinion, many scholars state, most feel,
research has shown, science says, some people say . . .

These phrases are called weasel words because they claim to report an
established consensus without providing any actual evidence. What’s the
alternative? If you have proof, show the best few pieces in your white
paper. But if you have only one source, or none at all, don’t try to
snow people with this type of expression. It won’t persuade anyone.

The Yahoo! Style Guide

No matter what you may think of Yahoo!, it remains one of the most
popular destinations on the web. Its writers and editors have a ton of
experience preparing content for websites, and much of their advice can
be applied directly to white papers. This style guide
(http://styleguide.yahoo.com) includes examples to illustrate each
point, before-and-after rewrites of many passages, and a 40-page list of
bothersome words that you can download and tweak for your own house
style. This book is much more than a style guide; any white paper writer
can use it as a lively training course in how to write more effectively.

Following house style

Some companies have an internal style guide that captures their views on
certain issues, like where to put commas or hyphens in a phrase like the
red green and black and white wires. When you plan a white paper for a
new client, ask whether the company has a house style guide; if so, get
a copy and check it out. If you have the luxury of working with an
editor, you can focus on your message and rely on the editor to bring
your text into line with the house style.

If your client lacks both a house style guide and an in-house editor,
the style you use is up to you. Remember to specify in your proposal
which style guide(s) you plan to follow. Doing so can help solve any
well-meaning but silly comments from reviewers who think there’s a
“right way” to spell or hyphenate some phrase.

[tip.eps] If you’re writing for a European company, ask whether it uses
British or American spelling for words like color/colour and
labor/labour. Don’t automatically use the British spelling; many
European companies sell mainly to the United States. Maybe it’s a
hangover from the American Revolution, but that u seems to irritate
Americans much more than the lack of it bothers Europeans.

A style guide isn’t just about spelling. It can also include how to
format the elements of a page, such as various levels of headings,
figure titles, footnotes, headers and footers, pull quotes, tables, and
so on. Many companies have guidelines on how to use their logos and
product names. You can attach templates, if any, for various types of
documents, and you can point to the external references you want
everyone to follow.

[remember.eps] A style guide can boost consistency, settle arguments,
and save time by capturing many little decisions all in one place.
Although many writers are self-admitted “word nerds,” keep your eye on
the ball: The goal of your white paper is to help your company or client
generate leads, nurture prospects, and cement sales. No style guide adds
anything to the bottom line compared to a truly effective white paper.

In the next sections, I walk you through using a house style guide and
even how to create your own in a matter of minutes.

Tweaking a style guide as needed

There’s no absolute “right” or “wrong” about house style; there’s only
what works and what doesn’t. So if you come across something in the
house style that interferes with your ability to create an effective
white paper, speak up. A style guide wasn’t carved in stone and handed
down by the Almighty from some mountaintop. People created it, and it
should evolve over time. If people don’t make suggestions, how will it
ever improve?

Make your point calmly and clearly, show an example, and send your input
to someone in a position to make a decision. If it doesn’t go your way,
accept the decision. Weightier issues are debated all the way to the
Supreme Court, and one side always loses. And if you happen to be the
custodian of the style guide, don’t be too defensive and unwilling to
bend. You probably don’t want to let your writers say “ain’t” or “dude”
in your white papers — but if they occasionally mix up that and which,
it ain’t the end of the world, dude.

Creating your own style guide

Most B2B buyers can’t tell whether you use fewer or less than correctly,
but almost anyone can spot a typo or an inconsistency, like when you
write smart phone one place and then smartphone a few lines later. Those
little things can have a big impact: They can distract a reader from
your argument and undermine the company’s professional image. One survey
showed that mistakes like those make B2B buyers wonder about the quality
of a company’s products and even the intelligence of its people.

If you’re working without an editor or house style to guide you, you can
protect yourself against these slip-ups by creating your own style
guide. And you don’t need to sink days into developing one. Here are two
quick methods I learned from a seasoned editor who worked for many book
publishers in Toronto. She had the same issue as any independent white
paper writer: How do you keep styles straight when you’re working for
several different clients?

[check.png] Method #1: Style on the fly: While drafting or revising a
white paper, start a new file, and as you work, record any term that you
can handle in more than one way, such as email/e-mail. Decide which way
you prefer, and note that in your style file. Then use Word to find all
occurrences in the form you don’t want to use (say email) and replace
them with your preferred usage (e-mail) to make your whole document
consistent. Then use your preferred style from then on.

At the end of your work session, make sure your whole word list is in
alphabetical order for quick reference, and add notes under general
headings, like “Punctuation.” And presto! You have a good start on a
style guide plus a white paper that follows it. For a smaller company,
this list may be all you ever need. And to show how thorough you are,
you can even send your draft style guide to your client as a separate
deliverable.

[check.png] Method #2: Style in 60 minutes: Using existing materials
from your company or client, you can follow these steps to generate a
house style guide in the shortest possible time. Even in 60 minutes, you
can get a lot done.

1. Gather a good selection of documents from the company, such as press
releases, marketing materials, manuals, and any previous white papers,
either PDFs or hard copies.

2. Create a new file and type in an initial heading, something like
“Style Guide for [Company] as of [date].”

3. Start scanning through the first document for words you can handle in
more than one way, such as GB or gigabytes. Type in all the alternatives
in alphabetical order. If you’re looking at PDFs on your screen, search
for both alternatives and note how often each one occurs. Add up those
occurrences to see which version is more popular within the company.

4. Scan for the next term. On the first few pages, you’ll find lots.
This number will taper off as you capture all the most common terms used
in the company’s materials.

5. Continue eyeballing and entering each new term in alphabetical order.
You may want to stop after you’ve scanned for 50 minutes or worked your
way through most of the documents.

6. Take the next ten minutes to decide how to handle each term in your
list.

[tip.eps] To use the whole web to help you decide, go to
www.googlefight.com and type in both versions, such as "back up" and
"backup." You'll see how many times each alternative occurs on the web,
like a popularity contest.

7. If you need to call a meeting to review and confirm your decisions,
circulate your file in advance as the agenda.

Refining Your Writing Process

No one can tell you how to write. No one else can dictate when, where,
or how you should get started, do a rewrite, or find out more about the
craft. But you don’t need to suffer through some clunky, ungainly
process whenever you sit down to write a white paper. Part III of this
book suggests a step-by-step process for completing a white paper so you
always know where you are and what to do next. But how do you actually
accomplish any of these steps? How do you create and refine a writing
process that really works for you?

This section encourages you to think about your writing process with an
open mind and consider ways to make your process faster and easier.
Among these ideas are figuring out the ideal time to write, switching
hats between writer and editor properly, and allowing enough time for
your ideas to gel. This section also touches on how to get yourself
going, use a mind map, and write in short bursts of time. Last but not
least, I recommend using positive visualizations that can bring you more
confidence, courage, and peace of mind as a writer.

Figuring out your best time to write

Everyone has a daily energy pattern. Some writers are like vampires:
They come out only at night, tapping on their keyboards as the winds
howl outside. I’m a bit of a night owl myself, but I also like getting
up early to get writing at 6 a.m. or so. As for that in-between time,
from mid to late afternoon, I never get much written then. The best
things for me to do at that time of day are answer e-mails, return phone
calls, do some research, or go for a walk. I know from experience that’s
my downtime.

How about you? Do you have a handle on the peaks and valleys of your
day? I’m not talking about those temporary surges of energy from
drinking coffee or eating power bars. I’m talking about your natural
rhythm, the daily energy pattern that recurs even on weekends when you
have no job duties. If you don’t understand your own pattern, keep a log
for a month or two. Note when you feel energized and can produce
creative work and when you’re at low ebb and barely awake. If you work
as an independent writer where you can organize your own workday, this
is critical. If you work in-house and must pretend to be alert all day
long, this can be challenging. In either case, when you know your
pattern, make sure to spend your peak times writing.

Wearing the right hat at the right time

Every writer has a split personality. (Finally, an accurate diagnosis
for your condition!) It’s true, although I prefer to express this with a
different image — having two hats to wear. One hat is the writer’s,
probably a black beret or blood-red fascinator perched jauntily on your
head, with huge bright feathers blooming out to convey your carefree,
creative side. The other hat is the editor’s, perhaps a banker’s black
bowler, a card-dealer’s green shade, or even an orange hard hat
(especially if you’re planning a lot of discussion with the writer) —
anything to convey a sensible, practical, worldly outlook.

When you wear the writer’s hat, your job is to put out a torrent of
words without looking back, with no judgment and no critique; it’s time
to create, connect, and expand. When you switch to the editor’s hat,
your job is to look at that creative output with a keen eye, making a
slew of judgment calls; it’s time to analyze, make distinctions, and
trim. After the writer gets out a draft, the editor takes over to shape
and polish that into a finished document.

This arrangement works perfectly well, as long as you don’t plunk your
hard hat on top of your fascinator. When both sides struggle for
control, it can feel like the editor is sitting in judgment over every
word the writer puts down or like the writer is still spewing out words
far past any reasonable cutoff point. In other words, trouble starts
when neither side will yield control at the appropriate time. Your
challenge as the “hat-check manager” is to put on the proper hat at the
right time and make the other one wait its proper turn.

Allowing ideas to ferment

One California vineyard used to claim, “We will sell no wine before its
time.” This statement presumably meant that every bottle was properly
aged to reach a drinkable state. I advise you to make the same rule for
your white papers. “Not selling any white paper before its time” means
having enough patience to do your research, digest it, plan, draft,
polish, sleep on it, and then polish your draft at least once more
before submitting it to any reviewers. You can’t do all that in two
days; there’s just too much information involved to process it that
fast.

Personally, I need two fermentation periods for every white paper:

[check.png] After a conference call, before I make up a white paper plan

[check.png] After doing a few days of research, before I write an
executive summary

Each fermentation period is at least a day or two. If that sounds like a
leisurely pace, it’s not; I routinely have five or six white papers on
the go, at various stages of completion. But I always try to carve out a
little time at those critical points in each project to let the latest
input bubble and percolate. I’m not saying every writer needs the same
amount of time, but if you study the “creative process,” you’ll find
that many researchers confirm the need for a certain incubation period
during which raw input is processed into insights.

[tip.eps] If you’re really pressed for time, review your notes on a
project just before bed. I do this when I’m juggling way too many
projects, and when I wake up the next morning, it’s as though part of my
mind was reviewing that material all night long. I can usually start
writing immediately, as though I’d allowed a whole day to mull over
those notes.

Tricking yourself to get started

Did you know the most common time of the week to commit suicide is 9
a.m. on Monday morning? Some people really hate their jobs! Even those
of us who enjoy our work sometimes take a while to get back into the
swing of things after a vacation, or even just a great weekend. The same
can apply to getting back into a white paper after a fermentation
period.

At times like that, I’ve discovered how to trick myself into getting
started. For example, I may say to myself, “I’m not going to do any
writing; I’m just going to review the plan.” Soon enough, I’m making
notes on what to do next, on where I found some great research, and so
on. Or I tell myself, “I’m not going to actually write anything; I’m
just jotting down some thoughts.” Pretty soon I’m writing longer and
longer notes, and those notes are turning into complete sentences and
eventually into paragraphs of a draft.

Those tricks may work for you, or you may need to develop some of your
own. Either way, find a technique for getting back in the saddle after a
break from a white paper.

Using a mind map

You’ve probably heard of mind mapping. It’s essentially a visual form of
outlining, where you draw a spiderweb or fishbone diagram of the central
points of your white paper. You can use different colors, shapes, sizes,
or anything else that helps map out your subject visually. Many
copywriters swear by this technique, saying it saves them time and helps
them solve problems. I can see how mind mapping can help build a complex
argument and make sure it all hangs together. I don’t often use it; but
the few times I’ve been stuck and tried a mind map, it’s helped me break
the jam.

You don’t need anything but paper and pencil to make a mind map; just
put down one big idea from your white paper, draw in another idea that
grows out of it, and you’re off and mind mapping. Or you can try out
different mind-mapping software, including free or low-cost apps for
your Android or iOS devices.

Writing in short bursts

Writing is hard work; there’s no doubt about that. So instead of
expecting to write for an entire afternoon, why not break up your
writing into short, doable bursts? The Pomodoro Technique is one proven
way to do that. Basically, this technique involves getting a kitchen
timer, setting it to 25 minutes, and working diligently on your white
paper without tolerating any interruptions until the timer goes off.
You’ll be amazed at how much you get written in that burst: maybe a
whole page, maybe a couple of pages.

Then you can take a break for five minutes to do anything else you want:
Check Facebook, get a drink of water, stare out the window, whatever.
After your break, turn on your timer and get back to work for another 25
minutes. After four Pomodoros (25-minute bursts of work), you can take a
longer break of up to half an hour. Check out
www.pomodorotechnique.com/goodies for more about this technique plus
some free downloads.

The unexpected benefit of using this technique is that, like many
people, you may actually write better when you write faster. You don’t
have the luxury for procrastinating, throat-clearing, or negative
thinking about how much stress you’re under. You simply have to produce,
just like an old-time journalist on deadline.

Using positive affirmations

Why are bad habits so hard to break? Why do some people fail at
everything they put their hand to? I’m no psychologist, but I believe
this has a lot to do with negative influences. Even friends and families
can hold people back with self-limiting beliefs.

The simplest way I’ve found to get more positive is with affirmations.
An affirmation is a short statement that expresses a desired goal as if
it already happened, reinforcing how great you feel to have achieved it.
And it’s a long stretch from wishful thinking. For example, “I’m going
to quit smoking on New Year’s Day” is just a wish, placed far in the
future, and not anchored with any emotion. To create an effective
affirmation, turn that desire into something more specific and powerful,
such as, “I really love having so much energy now that I’m living
without cigarettes.” Notice the difference? This affirmation confirms
that you’ve already quit smoking, is set in the present, and focuses on
a strong benefit you enjoy in place of smoking.

This technique works for many people. I think it’s something like
self-hypnosis; but instead of letting other people and your own negative
thinking hypnotize you, you take charge of the process and turn it in a
new, more positive direction. You can Google terms like “positive
affirmation” to find out more about this.

[tip.eps] If you practice any other forms of self-centering, such as
exercise, meditation, or prayer, remember to use them when you’re in the
thick of a white paper project. Especially at the start of your white
paper career, these are big, challenging projects that can feel like
slogging up an impossibly steep mountain. Use whatever works for you to
calm down, be positive, and believe that you will get there.

Challenging the myth of writer’s block

Did you ever hear of any old-fashioned journalists complaining about
“writer’s block”? They didn’t have time — they had a deadline to meet!

Most writers who claim to have “writer’s block” are really suffering
from something else. For example, they could have a poor process for
writing, or maybe they’re trying to work at the wrong time of day. They
may be wearing the wrong hat, letting the editor come out and pass
critical judgments on their first efforts, while they should be writing
rough drafts. They may have lost the capacity to trick themselves into
getting started or have skipped doing a mind map. They may be trying to
write for an entire day when a few short bursts would get them through
the slump. They may be indulging in negative self-talk, telling
themselves, “I’m not a writer! I’m no good! I will never write anything
good!”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[truestory_property.eps] Turning negative thoughts into positive
attitudes

Long after I became a professional writer, my writing process was still
painful. I used to start every project with cringing self-doubt, like I
was a complete imposter who couldn’t possibly pull off what my client
wanted. Every project was agony to start, not bad in the middle after I
got going, and then acutely painful at the end when I wondered whether
my client would like what I delivered.

One day, I heard a talk about creative visualization or the process of
“acting as if.” A light bulb went off. I realized I’d spent years
imagining writing as an excruciating process. That night, I came up with
a new mantra, “Writing is easy and fun for me!” Then I repeated that out
loud dozens of times a day for weeks. It worked! All my hesitation and
insecurity dropped away. Ever since I turned around my visualizations, I
get a big kick out of digging into every project, and I don’t ever want
to stop writing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[tip.eps] Having a poor process for writing can feel like a giant hand
pushing back against all your efforts. If this ever happens to you,
instead of labeling it ­“writer’s block,” go through this section again
and try some of these ideas:

[check.png] See how you can change your working conditions.

[check.png] Try some mind mapping.

[check.png] Trick yourself to get started again.

[check.png] Try to do a short Pomodoro for 15 or 20 minutes; if that
works, take a break and then do another and another.

[check.png] Ease off on the expectations and judgments.

[check.png] Try some positive affirmations.

Then get back to work. You can do this!

OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 16

Promote Like a Madman

In This Chapter

[arrow] Understanding why promoting your white paper is so important

[arrow] Choosing from dozens of possible promotions

You can create the most compelling and persuasive white paper in
history, but if the prospects in your target audience never encounter
it, all your efforts go to waste. Promoting your white paper is the
all-important final phase in publishing an effective white paper. Your
goal is to get your document in front of as many target readers as you
possibly can.

In this chapter, I discuss why you must recognize this need for
promoting your white paper, ideally treating it like a mini product
launch. I explain that you get the best results when you measure your
results, keep on doing whatever works best for you, and continue your
promotions for months. And to help you decide how to promote your white
paper, this chapter lists 40 tactics to choose from — everything from
creating a landing page to setting up an online advertising campaign.

[remember.eps] No company has the resources to use every tactic for
every white paper. Try the most likely ones, measure your results to
discover which tactics work best for which flavor of white paper, and
then make sure to do everything that pays off for you.

Recognizing the Need for Promotion

Sad to say, some companies create a white paper, stick it in the online
library buried deep in their website, and hope that their prospects
notice. When these companies see disappointing results, they often
conclude that “white papers don’t work.” But no tool works right if you
don’t use it properly. This approach misses the point of publishing a
white paper — to publish means to make something public. You need to
make your white paper public to all the target readers you can possibly
reach.

Your marketing team needs to work hard and smart during three critical
periods:

[check.png] Before the white paper is finished, when they need to make
promotional plans and get the campaigns ready

[check.png] As soon as the white paper is released, when they need to
swing into action, implement those plans, and promote the white paper
everywhere

[check.png] For weeks or months after the white paper is released, when
they need to track the results and continue using whatever tactics get
the best results

Without doing all of that, you likely won’t generate the volume of
leads, engage the number of prospects, or cement the number of sales you
need to justify the cost of creating the white paper. In fact, more
investment in more white papers is frittered away through weak
promotions than through any other pitfall.

[remember.eps] You must promote your white paper long enough and well
enough to generate the results you need to make your white paper a
success. Without adequate promotions, your white paper can sink like a
stone and make getting the budget to do the next one even harder. With
effective promotions, your marketing team can look like the heroes and
geniuses they really are.

Promoting a white paper like a product launch

Some marketers wonder how to promote a white paper. After all, it’s just
a document, not a real product or service in its own right. Yet you
already know how to do it. The best practice is to promote a white paper
like a product launch. Do most of the same things you do when your
company has a new product or service to bring to market.

Obviously, you won’t have the same budget to play with, but the
promotions you do for a product launch make an excellent starting place.
Some items are simply too costly, like throwing a free cocktail party at
an industry event. Eliminate any item that’s too expensive or
time-consuming to consider for a white paper. But don’t chuck out entire
categories of promotions, like social media or advertising, just because
you think they won’t work. Try everything and see what happens. Until
you try each tactic at least a couple of times, you won’t know whether
it works for your particular audience in your own niche.

Measuring your results

As you know, different audiences have different preferences. Some prefer
one channel or another and respond to one tactic or another. No one can
tell you in advance which tactics are going to work for your audience
and which are going to flop. Some marketers just try a few things here
and there and then move on to their next project. But that leaves a lot
to chance, with a big gap where your marketing dollars can leak out.

You can close that gap by measuring your results from each promotional
tactic. Then you can calculate the ROI of different tactics and compare
them to see which ones are most effective. Depending on the size of your
company and scope of your marketing budget, you may need different
metrics to measure your results for different white paper promotions.

Table 16-1 defines the most common metrics used to track white papers
and notes the key purpose of each metric. As you can see, many of the
metrics listed here may be interesting but not especially useful, like
the ones related to blogs, Twitter, and Facebook. Others — such as
downloads, leads, sales, and revenues — are vital for calculating the
specific ROI on a white paper campaign.

If your marketing team can track these metrics, you can use them to make
a convincing case for the effectiveness of white papers. After all, if
you can say, “We can attribute $3.2 million in revenues directly to our
Q2 white paper campaign . . .” no one’s going to argue when you suggest
publishing a few follow-up documents.

Table 16-1 Common Marketing Metrics for White Papers

  --------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Term                        Definition                                                                                                           Purpose
  Clicks                      The number of times anyone clicked on an ad for a white paper                                                        An alternate way to measure interest in a white paper; a raw number used to calculate CTR (see next)
  Click-through rate (CTR)    The total number of clicks divided by the total number of impressions for an ad                                      To measure the effectiveness of a web banner or pay-per-click ad
  Comments                    The number of comments posted after a blog entry about a white paper                                                 To measure the reach of the white paper content in the blogosphere
  Cost-per-lead               The total cost of a campaign divided by the number of leads generated by that campaign                               To compare the cost-effectiveness of various campaigns and tactics
  Downloads                   The number of times a PDF white paper was downloaded from a web page                                                 A key metric to track the reach of a white paper
  E-mail bounce rate          The number of undeliverable e-mails divided by the total number of e-mails sent                                      To measure the quality of an e-mail list; a hard bounce is a permanent problem, such as an e-mail address that no longer works, while a soft bounce is a temporary problem, such as a full inbox
  Landing page bounce rate    The ratio of visitors who leave a landing page quickly, as though they weren’t interested in it                      To measure roughly how engaging a landing page is to visitors; a high bounce rate means the wrong visitors are seeing that web page
  Leads                       The number of leads generated by a white paper, qualified by marketing, and passed on to sales                       A key metric to track the marketing ROI on a white paper campaign
  Likes                       The number of times something was “liked” on Facebook or YouTube                                                     To measure the reach of a white paper on Facebook; may not be relevant to sales
  Media pickups or mentions   The number of times the white paper was mentioned or quoted in offline media (newspapers, magazines, radio, or TV)   To measure the offline PR impact of a white paper
  Opens                       The number of people who opened an e-mail for a white paper                                                          To calculate the open rate (see next)
  Open rate                   The total number of opens divided by the total number of e-mails sent                                                To measure the effectiveness of an e-mail campaign for a white paper
  Page views                  The number of times a web page with an HTML white paper was visited                                                  To measure the reach of a white paper formatted as HTML, not PDF
  Permalinks                  The number of times the white paper was linked to by other blogs                                                     To measure roughly the reach of a white paper in the blogosphere
  Registrations               The number of visitors who filled in a registration form so they could view or download a white paper                To count how many prospects a white paper generated; note that the more questions you ask, the fewer registrations you get
  Reposts                     The number of times a white paper was reposted or quoted in other blogs                                              To measure the reach of the white paper content in the blogosphere
  Retweets                    The number of times a white paper was retweeted on Twitter                                                           To measure the reach of a white paper on Twitter; may not be relevant to sales
  Revenues                    The amount of revenue resulting from sales to qualified leads generated by a white paper                             Probably the most important metric of all, and very persuasive if you can track it
  Sales                       The number of sales resulting from qualified leads generated by a white paper                                        A key metric to track the results generated by a white paper campaign
  --------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Digging up sales and revenue numbers

You may be frustrated trying to unearth any numbers for the sales and
revenues driven by any particular white paper. Here are four possible
ways to find these metrics, assuming your finance, IT, and sales teams
give you their total cooperation. Some combination of these four
approaches should yield you numbers you can use.

[check.png] Use your CRM. If someone in your company routinely enters
“source of lead” into your customer relationship management (CRM)
system, use that field to find how many sales came from leads generated
from each specific white paper. Train whoever maintains the CRM system
to enter a partial title or part number so you can tell one white paper
from another. Otherwise, all your white papers may get lumped in
together and you won’t have any numbers to tell you whether some were
more effective than others.

[check.png] Cross-reference registrations. Compare the names, companies,
and locations of the people who registered to download the white paper
with the names, companies, and locations of people who bought since the
white paper was released. Any hit could be another sale generated by the
white paper.

[check.png] Calculate revenues from deal size. After you have the likely
number of sales attributed to a white paper, multiply the number of
sales by the average deal size for that product or service to find the
revenues that white paper drove.

[check.png] Total up actual revenues. Knowing the name of each customer
who bought because of the white paper, you can look up the actual
revenues from each sale, and any related follow-up sales, then total
them all up.

Repeating the most effective promotions

After you start measuring the results from your white paper, look for
patterns and trends. Some metrics, such as downloads, registrations, or
retweets, are faster to measure. Others, such as sales or revenues, can
take months or even years to measure, especially if your company has a
longer sales cycle. At the start, you probably want to focus on a few
short-term metrics and track them carefully, day by day or even hour by
hour.

[tip.eps] Whenever you see one tactic creating an uptick in downloads,
for example, do it again to check whether it works the second time. If
so and it’s something you can repeat — like publishing a blog post or
e-mailing to your house list — keep on repeating that tactic as long as
it keeps on generating results.

Many marketers forget that you can boost your results by sending the
same message to the same people more than once. This tactic uses the
age-old marketing concept of repetition — which explains why you keep on
seeing the very same TV ad for toilet paper over and over again.
Eventually, you may see that brand in the supermarket and reach for it,
even though you’re not sure why.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Don’t give leads to sales too soon

Just because someone downloaded a white paper doesn’t mean that person
is ready to talk to a salesperson. In fact, it’s pretty irritating to
get a phone call like this, “I noticed you just downloaded a white paper
from our site, and I wanted to follow up and see whether you have any
questions. . . .” Egad, give the person a day to read the thing! This
kind of overeager sales process can destroy any goodwill your white
paper creates.

If you’re on a marketing team responsible for generating leads for your
sales force, you need to sit down with your VP of Sales and define what
makes a “sales-ready lead.” Then your team can score all the leads you
generate and pass them on to sales only after they’re properly qualified
and considered worth pursuing.

Here are some things to consider when scoring leads:

[check.png] Job title: Do they fit your target audience? Are they at a
level with enough authority to make or at least recommend a purchase? Or
are they from some unlikely department, or are they students or
journalists doing research but unlikely to buy?

[check.png] Budget: Do they have an actual budget for their project? Or
are they just “seeing what’s out there” with no real intention of ever
buying?

[check.png] Time frame: Are they ready to buy now? If not, when will
they be? Or are they just wondering whether your offering can help their
business?

[check.png] Buying process: Do they have a selection committee? Who else
is on it? How often do they meet?

You can’t often know these things without interacting more with each
lead. Perhaps you can design a brief survey or ask a few more questions
on your next registration form as you nurture leads and continue to feed
them useful content. Perhaps a marketing person will need to contact
them by phone to find out where they stand; that’s more acceptable to a
B2B buyer than having a pushy salesperson call too early.

Tip: Be sure to build your white paper into the sales process your
company uses so it can help generate leads at the top of the funnel,
nurture prospects through the middle of the funnel, or cement sales at
the bottom of the funnel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

In B2B marketing, this tactic means that you can send the same piece of
direct mail to the same list, and additional people will open it the
second, third, and fourth times. Or you can send the same e-mail
announcing a white paper to anyone who didn’t open it the first time,
perhaps tweaking the subject line as a test. Anyone who opens the second
e-mail is a free bonus who took very little effort to reach. Another
example: You can tweet exactly the same message once a week, or every
two weeks, to keep on pounding the drums about an evergreen white paper
that still works for you. This approach is a standard content marketing
procedure with Twitter, so none of your followers will likely complain.

[remember.eps] To use a little repetition of my own, remember these
three tactics that you can safely repeat: sending a piece of direct mail
to anyone who didn’t already respond, sending a repeat e-mail to anyone
who didn’t open the earlier one, or tweeting exactly the same message
once a week or so.

Continuing your promotions

To squeeze every last drop of juice out of a white paper, don’t just
push it for a week or two and then think your work is done. You can
usually wring more results out of an effective white paper for months.
The ideal promotional period varies with the flavor of white paper.

For example, a backgrounder has the shortest life span; as soon as the
product changes, or the excitement of the product launch dies down, that
white paper may lose its appeal. A numbered list sits in the middle of
the pack; a provocative take on an issue that’s still topical can keep
on generating buzz for many months. And, of course, the long-distance
champion is the problem/solution, which can keep on generating results
for a year or more. As long as prospects are still downloading it, you
can keep up some modest promotions for it. At least, you can tell new
prospects, new channel partners, and new employees about it. And as long
as the industry is still suffering from the problem that white paper
dealt with — even years later — you can often give it a refresh, update
any research, and republish virtually the same white paper with a whole
new promotional campaign.

[truestory_property.eps] In 2006, I wrote a problem/solution white paper
for a client in New England who helps local retailers and mom-and-pop
shops promote their services to new arrivals in their neighborhoods.
Seven years later, it’s still up on the client’s website, attracting a
consistent trickle of interest. Over the years, it’s been downloaded
close to 2,000 times.

Choosing the Right Promotional Tactics for Your White Paper

The rest of this chapter presents 40 promotional tactics you can use for
any white paper. Clearly not every one works for every audience. Be
aware of these options, try as many as you can afford, and focus on the
ones that generate measurable results. Table 16-2 lists all the
promotions I consider must-do’s along with a rough guide to how much
effort and money each one takes to implement. All these items are listed
in chronological order, so I recommend that you work through this table
from top to bottom. For example, everything leads to the landing page
for your white paper. Without that, where are you going to point the B2B
prospects interested in that document? So creating an effective landing
page is the very first must-do tactic, the “square one,” for any white
paper promotion.

Table 16-3 lists the promotions I consider optional.

Table 16-2 Must-Do White Paper Promotional Tactics

  --------------------------------------------------------- ------------ --------
  Tactic                                                    Difficulty   Cost
  Create a landing page with an abstract.                   Medium       Low
  Feature it prominently on your website.                   Medium       Low
  Mention it in company newsletters.                        Easy         Low
  E-mail your sales force (if any).                         Easy         Low
  E-mail your channel partners (if any).                    Easy         Low
  E-mail your house opt-in list.                            Easy         Low
  Tweet it on Twitter.                                      Easy         Low
  Blog about it.                                            Easy         Low
  Announce it to LinkedIn groups.                           Easy         Low
  Publish a press release.                                  Medium       Medium
  Send it to relevant journalists.                          Easy         Low
  Send it to relevant bloggers.                             Easy         Low
  Get it mentioned in channel partner newsletters.          Easy         Low
  Post it on free white paper sites.                        Easy         Low
  Create a slide deck.                                      Medium       Low
  Send your slide deck to your sales force (if any).        Easy         Low
  Send your slide deck to your channel partners (if any).   Easy         Low
  --------------------------------------------------------- ------------ --------

Of course, delving into the details on any one of these topics — like
e-mail marketing, LinkedIn, or Twitter — could easily fill another book
or two. Check out www.dummies.com for titles on all the promotions
touched on in this chapter and more.

This list can hit only a few highlights and remind you about some
possible tactics you may have forgotten or never considered. You can
always flip through this chapter whenever you launch any new white paper
to remind yourself of some other possibilities that you haven’t tried
yet.

[tip.eps] A marketer’s job is never finished. No matter how much you do,
you can always do more. Don’t let these lists overwhelm you. Perhaps
plan to accomplish all the must-do’s, and then pick a number of the most
promising options from Table 16-3, and ignore all the rest.

Table 16-3 Optional White Paper Promotional Tactics

  --------------------------------------------------------------- ------------ --------
  Tactic                                                          Difficulty   Cost
  Mention it in your e-mail sig line.                             Easy         Low
  Mention it on your LinkedIn page.                               Easy         Low
  Mention it on your Google+ page.                                Easy         Low
  Sponsor a podcast.                                              Medium       Medium
  Sponsor a video chat.                                           Medium       Medium
  Send it to relevant analysts.                                   Easy         Low
  Submit a guest post to relevant blogs.                          Medium       Low
  Post it on channel partner websites.                            Easy         Low
  Get it mentioned in industry association newsletters.           Hard         Low
  Post it on industry association websites, portals, or forums.   Medium       Low
  Submit it to trade magazines.                                   Medium       Low
  Syndicate it through a content network.                         Easy         High
  Create a self-running presentation.                             Medium       Low
  Post your slide deck online.                                    Easy         Low
  Use your slide deck for a webinar.                              Hard         Medium
  Give a presentation at an industry conference.                  Hard         High
  Give out hard copies at trade shows and events.                 Easy         Medium
  Give out soft copies on flash drives at events.                 Easy         High
  Use it as a conversation starter.                               Hard         High
  Use it as a leave-behind.                                       Hard         High
  Set up a Google AdWords pay-per-click campaign.                 Medium       Medium
  Make an online display ad campaign.                             Hard         High
  Advertise in trade magazines.                                   Medium       High
  --------------------------------------------------------------- ------------ --------

Beginning your promotion at home

The first step in publishing a white paper is to post it on your website
where people can find it. You must immediately create an effective
landing page for the white paper, make as big a splash as you can on
your company’s home page, and tell all your closest subscribers and
prospects about it. This section provides a few tips on each of these
tactics.

Create a landing page with an abstract (must do)

You need a web page to be the go-to page where interested readers can
find the white paper. Don’t clutter the page with a lot of extra text,
side offers, or the company boilerplate. Focus on one thing: Getting
visitors to download the white paper. On this page, nothing else
matters.

Here are the basic elements of an effective landing page:

[check.png] Short, fixed URL: Keep the URL of the landing page short so
people can type it in if they see it offline. Make the URL fixed so it
won’t change in the future. And include this URL in the action step for
every other promotion.

[check.png] Thumbnail and abstract or executive summary: To show
prospects what they’ll get, include a thumbnail of the cover. Provide a
brief abstract of the white paper contents, focused on the benefits an
ideal reader will derive from it. Or include the entire executive
summary to give visitors a good preview of the contents.

[check.png] Registration form: If you want visitors to register before
they can download the white paper, include a registration form right on
the landing page. Don’t ask for too much info; name, company name,
e-mail, and zip code are plenty to start. Research shows that the more
fields you ask for, the fewer people register. Just because your CRM
system has many fields for every prospect, don’t expect someone looking
for a white paper to type all those in for you.

Feature it prominently on your website (must do)

Show your white paper on your company’s home page; the bigger and
bolder, the better. Of course, the larger the company, the harder it can
be to command space on the corporate site. If you can do it, feature the
cover of the white paper to build more appeal. Direct interested
visitors from your home page to your landing page with a single click on
the thumbnail.

Mention it in company newsletters (must do)

If you have an e-newsletter you send to a house list of subscribers,
mention the white paper in it. Perhaps highlight some intriguing factoid
to get people’s attention. You can safely mention the same white paper
in a couple of issues in a row; any more and it can start to sound
stale.

Using cost-effective e-mail

E-mail is a wonderfully low-cost way to get your message out — if you
use it carefully. You can mention the white paper in your e-mail
signature, and e-mail a compelling message about it to your sales force,
channel partners, and house list of opt-in friends and prospects. In
every e-mail, point to the landing page so your recipients can always
find the document and also forward your e-mail to others. This section
provides a few tips on each of these tactics.

E-mail your sales force and channel partners (must do)

You must let your sales force know about the white paper and how their
prospects can benefit from reading it. Then let them continue to spread
the word and distribute the white paper to their contacts.

By the same token, you must let all your channel partners know about the
white paper. Even if a few of your partners are “frenemies” who
sometimes compete and sometimes cooperate with your company, let them
know about the white paper.

E-mail your house opt-in list (must do)

Maybe you already e-mailed your house opt-in list with your
e-newsletter. If you have a separate house list for friends, clients,
prospects, former employees, or other stakeholders, you should tell them
all about the white paper.

[remember.eps] Sending one e-mail isn’t enough. Not everyone opens every
e-mail that you send. Many people, even though they’re interested, may
be on the road, distracted, or just too busy to get around to it the day
it pops up in their inbox. So resend the same e-mail to everyone who
didn’t open it the first time. Presto! You’ll likely double the open
rate for your message.

Mention it in your e-mail sig line (optional)

Insert a few words in your signature line about the white paper,
including a link to the landing page, and use it for the next month or
so. This tactic is extremely low effort and low cost. If everyone on
your marketing team adds a line in his signature, you can reach
thousands of stakeholders and prospects. I call this tactic optional
only because you may already be using your sig line for other purposes,
your company may have a standard format you can’t deviate from, or your
sig line may already be long enough.

Talking it up through social media

Social media provides a powerful medium for promoting your content,
engaging an audience, and developing prospects. To use social media to
promote your white paper, write several blog posts about it, tweet it on
Twitter for weeks, mention it on your company LinkedIn and Google+ pages
(if any), and tactfully announce it to any relevant LinkedIn groups. You
can also use it as the basis for creating a talk radio podcast and a
talk show video. This section provides a few tips on each of these
tactics.

Tweet it on Twitter (must do)

No matter what you think of Twitter, this tactic is a must-do because
it's so quick and low cost. In a series of tweets, stress the title, the
benefits of reading the white paper, and any unique factoids or
provocative statements that it contains. With a free service like
HootSuite (www.hootsuite.com), you can write a month's worth of tweets
in an hour or two. And not every tweet has to be unique; many Twitter
users repeat the same tweets every week or so without losing their
followers.

Blog about it (must do)

You can turn any white paper into several blog posts. For example, every
key feature and benefit in a backgrounder can become a separate blog
post. A numbered list can be stripped down for a post that directs
readers to the full white paper for details on each point. And a
problem/solution can be broken into four blog posts: the industry-wide
problem, the drawbacks of traditional solutions, the new and improved
solution, and what to look for in an ideal solution. If you stir up any
debate so that people start to comment and argue, you can fan the flames
to carry on the discussion, always pointing back to the landing page for
the white paper that started all the fuss.

Announce it to LinkedIn Groups (must do)

If you’re not already following certain LinkedIn Groups that deal with
your market space, you should be. After you follow any group for a
while, you get to know its culture. Then you can tactfully announce the
white paper in a way that fits each group. This tactic is a must-do for
a problem/solution white paper that contains truly educational content.

Mention it on your LinkedIn and Google+ pages (optional)

If your business has a company LinkedIn or Google+ page, announce the
white paper there. If not, think about whether these pages would make
sense for your business.

[warning_bomb.eps] Most B2B marketers don’t bother with Facebook for one
simple reason: Most people use Facebook to keep in touch with other
people. Few people use it to research B2B products and services.
Instead, they use Google+, LinkedIn, professional forums, trade
magazines, and journals. Unless you have compelling evidence that your
target B2B audience is on Facebook, actively comparing notes about their
B2B purchases, don’t waste your time with it. Don’t listen to stories
about what companies like Coca-Cola (B2C) and Intel ($$$) are doing on
Facebook, and why you should be there, too. Keep your eye on the prize:
B2B sales, not Facebook “likes.”

Sponsor a podcast (optional)

Do you have any subject matter experts or executives who can present the
ideas in the white paper in an especially interesting way? Think about
interviewing them in a talk radio format and recording your conversation
as a podcast. You can distribute this podcast on your website as a
streaming and downloadable MP3. A little music at the start and end and
a lead-in like a radio announcer make it sound more professional. And a
podcast doesn’t have to be long; 10 or 15 minutes should do nicely. At
the end, give the URL of the full white paper several times, like how
radio ads repeat the phone number of a local business so you can
remember it or jot it down.

Sponsor a video chat or vlog (optional)

If you can do an audio, why not try a video? Find some willing guests
and a good host from your team, and you can create a pseudo-talk show
segment about the ideas in the white paper. Of course, creating the talk
show set, arranging good lighting, and even doing some makeup so your
guests don’t look like they’re sweating under an interrogation lamp all
takes effort. But doing these things is less costly than it was a few
years ago, and seasoned videographers are available to help in most
cities, if you need one.

This video should be lighter in tone than a podcast, so try to generate
some laughs. And it should likely run only five or ten minutes max. You
can edit out any slow bits to keep up the pace. Run the URL of the
landing page across the screen several times throughout the show, like
an infomercial showing a 1-800-BUY-NOW number. And then post your video
to your website and YouTube channel (if any).

Getting it to the influencers

Some people are influencers who can reach a wide circle of readers or
followers. To help reach these people, you need to publish a press
release and send it along with the white paper to any analysts,
bloggers, or journalists who cover your space. You can also submit guest
posts to any blogs that accept them. This section provides a few tips on
each of these tactics.

Publish a press release (must do)

Every white paper deserves a press release, which can be as simple as a
one-page announcement that a white paper on such-and-such a topic is now
available from such-and-such URL. Emphasize the intriguing elements of
the content and the benefits to the target reader. Give the release
itself a snappy headline, maybe some spinoff from the white paper’s
title. Then spend a few hundred dollars to send it out through an online
press release syndication service; that’s worth it.

Send a package to relevant journalists (must do)

You do maintain a list of all the journalists who cover your market
space, right? If not, start building one now. That exercise may take a
day or more, but having such a list (and keeping it up-to-date) is worth
it. When you have this list, send your press release and white paper to
each journalist and editor through the appropriate channel:

[check.png] Use courier for major journalists and columnists working for
leading business publications or websites.

[check.png] Use express post for medium-level journalists working for
medium-level trade magazines and websites.

[check.png] Use e-mail for everyone else on your list, including any
journalists who are minor, over-the-hill, or actively hostile to your
company. Don’t expect them to look at it.

Then continue to engage with the most promising and receptive
journalists, patiently. Don’t phone them up and ask whether they got
your white paper and are going to write about it. They hate that!
Pestering most journalists makes them less likely to write about your
company. Ideally, your white paper is so intriguing and
thought-provoking that they’ll mention it, or at least keep your company
in mind for a mention in the near future.

[warning_bomb.eps] Having worked as a journalist for many years, I can
tell you that e-mail is a terrible way to distribute anything to the
media. When I was editing a software industry newsletter, I was swamped
with e-mails from morning to night, at least 200 a day, and often more.
No white paper ever stands out in that kind of tsunami. But when someone
sent me a package by courier or express post, I sat up and took notice.
And when a handful of companies actually sent me a bottle of wine at
Christmas, I remembered them — heck, I’m only human. That’s not to say
you can bribe your way to better coverage. But at least you can rise
above the thousands of other companies whose marketing teams do nothing
more imaginative than click Send.

Send your white paper to relevant bloggers (must do)

If you don’t already maintain a list of all the top bloggers who cover
your market space, start building one now. That exercise will take time,
especially if you get lost in reading their past posts and seeing who
else they link to. When you have this list, send your press release and
white paper to the relevant bloggers by e-mail. First, you may want to
have someone on your team start following their blog and posting
relevant comments so they recognize your company name. Then follow up
with bloggers who show the most interest.

[tip.eps] Some blogs accept guest posts that would interest their
audience. If you think a post based on your white paper matches the
interests of any blogger in particular, query him about submitting a
guest blog. He may jump at the chance to have someone else provide some
professionally written content that’s on topic for his audience.

Send a package to relevant analysts (optional)

Another list you, and every B2B marketing team, should build is for all
the analysts who cover your market space. You have no guarantee that any
analyst actually follows your niche, so locate the closest or most
interested ones, even if that takes calling them up one by one. When you
have this list, send your press release and white paper to the relevant
analysts by snail mail. To them, this material will likely be “deep
background,” so speed isn’t critical. Then stay in touch with the most
receptive analysts.

Promoting it through third parties

Another fabulous way to get any white paper out there is to promote it
through third parties with whom you have some natural connection. You
can arrange to post the white paper on the websites of your channel
partners and get it mentioned in their newsletters. Similarly, try to
get it posted on the websites of any related industry associations,
portals, or forums, and mentioned in their newsletters. You can also
submit it to relevant trade magazines as an opinion piece or guest
column. And, of course, post it on any white paper sites that aggregate
content for no fee. This section provides a few tips on each of these
tactics.

Get it mentioned in channel partner newsletters (must do)

If any of your channel partners publish a regular e-newsletter, they may
be willing to publish a notice about your white paper with a link to
your landing page. They always need relevant content and announcements
for their subscribers, so they may welcome your request to mention or
link to your white paper. You should probably write up an item for them
so it takes absolutely no effort for them to publish, and all the
details are accurate.

Post it on free white paper sites (must do)

A certain number of websites aggregate content aimed at particular
markets, where you can post the white paper for no charge. And all the
commercial syndication services like KnowledgeStorm
(www.knowledgestorm.com), TechTarget (www.techtarget.com), and Ziff
Davis (www.ziffdavis.com) have free services where you can submit a
white paper. Posting on these sites is worth doing; you never know who
may find your white paper on one of those sites.

Post it on channel partner websites (optional)

If any of your channel partners have a website with a place for content
like white papers — or even if they don’t — that can be a likely place
to announce your white paper and attract good prospects.

Some partners may be okay with using your landing page, while others
want any prospects to register with their site to get your content. You
don’t necessarily want to help another company, even a channel partner,
build up their list by using your content. Try to negotiate some way to
access the list of people who download your white paper, or create a
special version of that white paper with a call to action that brings
readers back only to your site for the next step.

Get it mentioned in industry association newsletters (optional)

Most industry associations publish some form of newsletter or
e-newsletter, and they always need news and relevant content for their
subscribers. Ask whether you can get your white paper mentioned in their
newsletter. You should probably write up a draft announcement so it’s
even less effort for them, and all the details are letter-perfect.

Post it on industry association websites, portals, or forums (optional)

Many websites devoted to a certain market niche publish white papers
that interest their visitors. Most of these sites likely want to post
your content themselves, and you have less bargaining strength than with
one of your own channel partners. After all, they’re doing you a favor
by putting your content in front of their audience of likely prospects.
You may be able to negotiate a free mention in their e-newsletter or
something similar in return for your content. And you may want to create
a special version of that white paper with a call to action that brings
readers back to your site only for the next step.

Submit it to trade magazines (optional)

Do you follow any trade magazines that you believe would be interested
in publishing the white paper, or portions of it, as an opinion piece or
guest column? Familiarize yourself with the publication before you
approach it. You can read through six months’ worth of back issues or
check out the media kit, which describes the mission and audience of the
publication. For more discussion on how to approach a trade magazine
editor about repurposing a white paper, see Chapter 8.

Syndicate it through a content network (optional)

If you have the budget and you really want major exposure, you can
arrange to syndicate the white paper through a content network like
KnowledgeStorm, TechTarget, or Ziff Davis. You may have to pay a setup
fee, and you’ll certainly pay for every lead you receive. These fees can
quickly add up to thousands of dollars. Larger companies use these
services all the time to generate leads to qualify and nurture through
the sales funnel. A certain number of these leads must eventually turn
into sales, because these companies continue to use these services. But
let the buyer beware: You need deep pockets to use this tactic.

Using a slide deck

Any flavor of white paper can be readily transformed into a slide deck,
giving you another piece of content to promote. When your deck is
complete, you can share it with your sales force and channel partners
and post it online on several slide-sharing sites. You can even use your
slides to create a webinar or a presentation at an industry conference
or event. This section provides a few tips on each of these tactics.

Create a slide deck (must do)

A slide deck makes a natural complement to a white paper: If the white
paper is the ice cream, the slide deck is the cone that supports and
presents it. For a backgrounder, each significant feature or benefit can
fill one slide. For a numbered list, each point can inspire one or two
slides. For a problem/solution, you can devote one or two slides to each
section of the classic structure: a widespread problem, each traditional
solution and its drawbacks, the new improved solution, and the buyer’s
guide. When the visuals are done, add speaker’s notes to each slide so
other users can provide more details about the content.

Send your slide deck to your sales force and channel partners (must do)

When your slide deck is complete with speaker’s notes, send it to your
sales force so they can use it to boost their own sales efforts. They’ll
likely study your presentation and even use some of the same phrasing.
And they may well present your slide deck or some part of it to their
prospects. This is a practical sales tool that you can distribute as a
spinoff of your white paper.

Also send your slide deck with speaker’s notes to all your channel
partners. Doing so serves three purposes that should help motivate and
retain your partners: reminds them about your company, helps train them
on the problem your offering solves and its powerful features and
benefits, and puts a good selling tool in their hands.

Create a self-running presentation (optional)

Think about recording the speaker’s notes as voice-over narration so you
can create a self-running presentation. You just need a good presenter
with a pleasant voice who understands the content and a decent
microphone. The final results can run off your website, from your
YouTube channel, or from an unattended kiosk in your trade show booth.

Post your slide deck online (optional)

With or without narration, you can post your slide deck online on one of
several slide-sharing sites. Although these sites are a long shot for
attracting ideal leads, you never know. And the price is right — free.
Four to get you started are Scribd (www.scribd.com), SlideShare
(www.slideshare.com), SlideBoom (www.slideboom.com), and myBrainshark
(www.mybrainshark.com).

Use your slide deck for a webinar (optional)

This tactic is ambitious, but it’s a great way to repurpose a white
paper and squeeze even more ROI out of it. You can use your slide deck
with speaker’s notes for an online webinar for prospects. This tactic
does require certain infrastructure, some way to take online
registrations, and webinar software to enable participants to see the
slides, hear the audio, use chat to post questions during the show, and
so on. You’ll need to promote the webinar strongly for a few weeks.

And be prepared to follow up with those who registered but didn’t
attend. They’re still interested; they just expect you to send them the
recorded version to view in their own time. Make a recording of the
webinar and give all the participants access to it. And, of course, put
up that video on your YouTube channel.

Give a presentation at an industry conference (optional)

If your white paper is truly fresh and informative, ask to get on the
agenda at an industry conference. You do keep a list of all the relevant
conferences and events for your market space, right? If your proposal
gets accepted, ask your company’s best presenter to make the trip, and
bring along a box of the white paper printed in color for handouts to
those who come to the presentation. You can also write up this
presentation in a trade journal or website devoted to your market space,
generating even more PR.

Talking about it face to face

Be ready to give out hard copies of the white paper at any trade show or
industry event that anyone from your sales or marketing team attends.
And if these tactics make sense, your sales force can use the white
paper as a conversation starter or leave-behind on sales calls. This
section provides a few tips on each of these tactics.

[warning_bomb.eps] Note that I label three of these four tactics as
“high cost” in Table 16-3 because of the vast expense to exhibit at a
trade show or get face time with an executive at a B2B prospect company.
These expenses include flying across the country, renting a car, staying
in a hotel, eating in restaurants, and all the other high costs of
traveling. These costs can really drive up your cost-per-lead to an
unsustainable level.

Give out hard copies at trade shows and events (optional)

Be armed and ready at any trade show or industry event that you or your
team members plan to attend. Bring a box of white papers printed in
color to put in your literature stands and give out to likely prospects.
That expense is a minimal add-on to the many costs of exhibiting at a
show.

Give out soft copies on flash drives at events (optional)

Another way to distribute a white paper at an event is to load it on a
flash drive emblazoned with your logo. You can purchase flash drives in
bulk for only a few dollars each, and the provider can copy your content
onto each drive. Then you can give those out, the same way exhibitors
used to give out CDs. But the typical caveat applies: Many casual
passersby will grab a flash drive and then go home and give it to their
kids without once looking at the contents. So you may want to hand them
out sparingly and reserve them for serious prospects only.

Use it as a conversation starter (optional)

Your sales force can use the white paper to start conversations with
likely prospects. In fact, a white paper gives a salesperson a perfect
reason to reach out to the contacts they’re trying to develop, to offer
them some useful or educational content. This tactic is most useful for
salespeople who work trade shows, make cold calls, network, or otherwise
develop their own in-person appointments with prospects.

Use it as a leave-behind (optional)

A white paper can be left behind with prospects after a sales call,
especially if it reinforces some of the topics discussed during that
meeting. To really work well in this situation, it helps to have a whole
library of white papers so that the salesperson can select precisely the
one that fits the occasion best. Again, this tactic is useful only for
salespeople who meet with prospects in person.

Advertising, online and offline

No doubt about it, advertising can be pricy. Not every company can
afford it, and not every white paper deserves it. But if you’re selling
B2B systems worth millions of dollars and you routinely spend several
hundred dollars for a qualified lead, advertise away! It still works for
many businesses, especially those selling horizontally across many
sectors, where the audience is harder to find than in a vertical market,
which is easier to target.

Of course, you can advertise a white paper in many places, and this
brief mention can’t possibly deal with them all. Two main distinctions
to remember: online versus offline advertising, and direct-response
versus image advertising (or branding).

[check.png] Online advertising covers electronic media like the web,
mobile devices, and e-mail, while offline advertising includes
everything else: newspapers, magazines, radio, TV, the Yellow Pages, and
so on. Online advertising is generally more targeted and instant, so you
can see the ROI of your campaigns and adjust them within minutes.
Offline advertising is generally more scattershot and slower, so you may
be committed to running ads and paying for them long after you realize
they’re not generating any business.

[check.png] Direct-response advertising aims to generate a specific
result, such as taking the next step in the sales cycle toward buying a
product. Image advertising aims to promote a brand, without triggering
any specific action. You want to use direct-response ads with a twist:
Instead of encouraging viewers to buy, you want them to download your
white paper. In this context, always advertise the content of the white
paper, not the product, the brand, or the company.

[tip.eps] From time to time, an ad salesperson may approach you with a
“great opportunity” to buy space in some magazine, directory, or website
at a big discount. This scenario is an opportunity only if you already
decided that you want and need to advertise in that outlet. Otherwise,
it’s an opportunity to throw away some marketing dollars. Make a
marketing plan and stick to it; don’t get blown off course by every
random deal that comes your way.

Set up a Google AdWords PPC campaign (optional)

If you believe good prospects will search for certain terms that exactly
match your white paper, you can set up a pay-per-click (PPC) campaign
through AdWords and start buying clicks.

[warning_bomb.eps] AdWords isn’t something you can master in an
afternoon. A whole industry has grown up to advise companies how to
design these campaigns. If someone on your team understands PPC and you
have the budget to spare, by all means give it a try. Just don’t forget
to cap your monthly budget so you don’t get stuck with any runaway
costs. But if you’ve never tried PPC before, you should probably leave
it alone until you’ve exhausted nearly every other option in this list.

Make an online display ad campaign (optional)

If you think PPC is out of this world, online display ads are out of
this galaxy. In fact, I’ve never heard of any company taking out online
display ads for a white paper. Maybe some do, and maybe this tactic will
become the norm in the future. A cute little ad that pops up on a
relevant web page, showing the cover of a white paper your prospect
would be interested in — who wouldn’t click on that? You may need to
enlist the help of an interactive agency to get started and bring in
some positive results. Again, if you have some expertise and a budget to
experiment with, go ahead. But I would put this tactic near the bottom
of the list.

Advertise in trade magazines (optional)

If your white paper speaks to a certain defined vertical market with its
own trade magazines, you may want to consider advertising it in those
magazines. You don’t need a full page; you can buy one-quarter or
one-eighth of a page and probably do just as well. You can run the same
ad for several issues running, or maybe every issue for a whole year, if
you’re confident it will generate the kind of leads you’re looking for
at a cost-per-lead you can stomach. Again, use your ad to show the cover
of the white paper, stress the benefits of reading it in a few short
snippets of text, and emphasize the URL of the landing page.

OceanofPDF.com

Part V

The Part of Tens

[9781118496923-pp0501.eps]

[pt_webextra_bw.TIF] Enjoy an additional White Papers For Dummies Part
of Tens chapter for free at www.dummies.com/extras/whitepapers.

In this part . . .

[check.png] Get tips for avoiding ten common problems that can creep
into your white papers.

[check.png] Discover best practices for designing an eye-catching white
paper.

[check.png] Find suggestions for improving a white paper title.

OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 17

Ten White Paper Problems and How to Solve Them

In This Chapter

[arrow] Giving your white paper a proper title, beginning, and end

[arrow] Toning down any hype or sales pitch

[arrow] Checking your white paper’s length and flow of ideas

[arrow] Getting a professional to check over your white paper draft

Most people like ice cream, but not everyone can whip up a tasty batch
on his own. The same applies to white papers: Even though a marketing
team may know what a white paper looks like, they can easily create a
mess if they don’t have a good recipe to follow and some experience
developing effective content. Many white papers don’t turn out well,
often because they’re missing some key ingredients or they weren’t
planned properly from the start.

In this chapter, I look at ten common problems that afflict many white
papers today and how you can solve them. Fortunately, if you identify
these issues in time, you can save your white paper from being passed
over and pushed to the back of the freezer, never to be taken out and
savored by any prospects.

Boring, Nondescript Title

Many potential B2B buyers first encounter your white paper as a short
snippet in a list of search results with only its title to go by. How
can a white paper with a boring title ever get noticed? You have to keep
the title lively by doing one (or more) of the following:

[check.png] Use active verbs and numbers.

[check.png] Include the benefits to the reader.

[check.png] Pitch it to a specific job title.

[check.png] Suggest that it offers inside information, tips, or gotchas
that readers need to know.

[check.png] Add urgency with time-specific words, like now or today.

You can even combine all these tips to create a winning title, such as
“7 Things Every IT Director Must Do to Protect Your Network Today.”

But don’t just slap an intriguing title on a tired, worn-out document.
That’s as bad as calling a tub of freezer-burned,
well-past-its-best-before-date vanilla a fresh batch of chocolate
walnut-crunch. You can even call that false advertising. Instead, use
the freshest research and the perfect recipe to whip up a white paper of
the ideal flavor, and make sure it delivers on the promise of its title.
For more tips on how to pump up a white paper title, see Chapter 19.

No Summary at the Start

Just about every executive today has too much to read, too much to
remember, too much to do, and too much to think about. A white paper
that doesn’t ease into the content is like a pushy waiter who starts
serving up ice-cream sundaes before even showing you the dessert menu.

Be polite. Help your readers decide in advance whether your white paper
is what they want by providing an introduction, abstract, overview, or
executive summary at the very start. In other words, “tell them what
you’re going to tell them.” Give them a one-page summary with a brief
recap of the key points covered in your white paper. They’ll likely scan
that much and then decide whether to go on. And even if they don’t, at
least you get your argument in front of them in a nutshell.

Some people say a summary is useless repetition, asking, “Why not just
get on with your story?” But any teacher can tell you that a little
repetition is a good thing that helps your message sink in. And any
waiter knows you offer the dessert menu before you start dishing out
banana splits.

No Conclusions at the End

Echoing your summary at the start, every white paper should include some
brief conclusions at the end. But why? Isn’t this just more useless
repetition? No, providing an introduction at the start and conclusions
at the end are well-established conventions in many forms of
communication. These elements apply perfectly well to white papers, too.
In the executive summary, you tell your readers what you’re going to
tell them; in the main body, you tell them; and in the conclusions, you
tell them what you told them.

The conclusions are especially useful for busy executives who flip to
the back of your document to see “the bottom line.” If you repeat your
key take-away messages in a few short sentences at the end, that doubles
the chances that those messages will get through. You work hard to get
the right B2B prospects to download and review your white paper, so
don’t let them go without a suitable wrap-up. In fact, the conclusions
to a white paper are like the cherry on top of an ice-cream sundae: a
small touch that gives the whole dish a well-rounded sense of
completeness.

No Call to Action

The final sentence of your conclusions should be your call to action,
where you outline what you want your readers to do after they finish
reading. You may suggest that they find out more about what they read,
continue to engage with your company, or take the next step in the
buying process. Here’s an easy formula for creating a call to action:

To find out more about how [name of offering or company] can help your
[business, organization, or team] [#1 benefit covered in white paper],
[do something].

The more specific the action you want your readers to take, the better
results you get and the easier it is to track the outcome. This may mean
that you set up a landing page, design a webinar, create an ROI
calculator, or do something else to keep your readers interested. One
white paper can’t do it all. Ideally, a B2B vendor builds a multistep
marketing campaign with all the appropriate content to draw prospects
into the top of your sales funnel, nurture them through the middle, and
pull them toward a sale at the bottom. The call to action in each of
your white papers should urge readers to take the next step along that
path.

Not the Right Length

Your white paper should make an impression in the first two or three
pages. But that doesn’t mean a two-page flyer can serve as an effective
white paper. Such a short document just doesn’t have enough room to
deliver the kind of depth called for in a backgrounder or
problem/solution. And if you do a short numbered list of just a page or
two, it’s more realistic to call it an “article” or “blog post,” not a
white paper.

For most business people, five to six pages (or 2,500 to 3,500 words) in
the main body is about the right length for a backgrounder or numbered
list. This length is enough to deliver your message, especially if you
format it to be easy to scan. Use white space, bullets, tables —
anything to break up the solid wall of gray text. For a backgrounder,
technical people can often tolerate a longer white paper that offers
more detail, even up to 25 or 30 pages. But in a problem/solution, if
you run on much longer than 10 or 12 pages, you can lose a lot of your
audience.

[remember.eps] You can sidestep this problem by breaking up longer
documents into separate white papers of five or six pages apiece, each
on a more focused topic. Doing so gives you an added benefit: You get
two or more chances to reach your target audience, instead of taking an
“all or nothing” approach with a single document stuffed with too much
information.

Sales Pitch in Disguise

Publishing a thinly veiled sales pitch labeled as a white paper is the
worst practice in white papers today. Some lame-brained marketers even
reformat glossy brochures with a less attractive look and call them
“white papers.” But this tactic is guaranteed to backfire. Every survey
ever taken of B2B buyers says the same thing: White paper readers hate
sales pitches. They hate any bait-and-switch games that a vendor plays.
They hate wasting their time. If you advertise “triple-rich chocolate”
but actually dish up skim-milk vanilla, your B2B prospects will quickly
realize it, chuck aside your white paper, and think very poorly of your
company.

[remember.eps] An effective white paper helps a business reader
understand an issue, solve a problem, or make a decision. Readers expect
a white paper to provide useful information that helps them on the job.
Jumping into a sales pitch irritates anyone looking for helpful,
objective information. It can even kill your chance of staying on that
prospect’s list of possible vendors. So if you’re writing a sales
letter, call it a sales letter. If you’re writing a brochure, call it a
brochure, not a white paper. Don’t let sales-y copywriting contaminate
your white paper and turn it into a sales pitch that turns bitter on the
tongues of all your prospects.

Not Enough Proof to Back Up Claims

Just because your CEO says something doesn’t mean anyone else will
believe it. Do you believe everything you hear? Just because your
website makes some claim doesn’t mean every visitor will accept it. Do
you believe everything you find on the web? This problem is where many
white papers fall down: Without enough solid facts to support their
claims, they have no power to engage or persuade anyone about anything.

A white paper needs a good structure of supporting evidence: facts,
figures, names, dates, places, statistics from impeccable sources,
quotes from industry experts, and stories from happy clients. Think of
this proof as the cone that gives the ice cream its support so it can
stand tall. Without well-researched and convincing proof, a white paper
is about as interesting as a puddle of ice cream melting on the
sidewalk.

For more on finding and using convincing proof points, see Chapter 15.

Not Enough, or Not Good Enough, Graphics

Any white paper gains more flavor when you include at least one concept
graphic to sum up its key points. You can be sure that almost every
reader looks at the graphics as he scans through your document. And
nearly everyone can grasp a picture faster and remember it better than
text. But for many marketing people and writers, coming up with
effective graphics can be tough. Fortunately, you have options.

You may be able to find some appropriate graphics in-house and tweak
them for your purposes. Make sure to simplify lines and boxes flying off
in all directions, the way most engineers sketch. And redo any tired
PowerPoints. Draw all the colors from the same palette, perhaps one that
harmonizes well with your company logo. If you can’t find what you need
and you have a few dollars in your budget, you can sketch out your ideas
and then give your rough sketches to a professional artist to create
more finished versions.

If budget is an issue, you can find affordable photos on a site like
iStockphoto (www.istockphoto.com), which is well indexed and overflowing
with possibilities. Or try SmartDraw (www.smartdraw.com), the
easy-to-use graphic software intended for business professionals. For
more about SmartDraw, see Chapter 15. One final suggestion: Test out
each graphic on a few people from your target audience. If they don't
understand it, go back to the drawing board for another revision.

No Logical Flow of Ideas

To help a problem/solution white paper linger in the mind like chocolate
lingers on the taste buds, you need an effective flow of ideas. If your
white paper has no overall design to hold it together, few readers will
find it compelling or memorable, especially if they “read” with a
typical skim-scan-and-skip approach.

Try one of the following tried-and-true methods for building a logical
argument, dating back to the ancient Greeks.

[check.png] Start with the known, and then delve into the unknown.

[check.png] Start with the past, describe the present, and project into
the future.

[check.png] Start with an overview and drill down to the details.

[check.png] Start with the most important and move to the least
important.

[check.png] Start at the beginning of a process and follow it step by
step to the end.

For more specifics on how to structure a problem/solution white paper,
see Chapter 8. A backgrounder or a numbered list can be more modular,
with less need for a tight logical argument connecting A to B. But even
so, you can’t afford to skip all over randomly. You need to use the same
level of detail throughout. Your readers can absorb your points better
when you express each section or numbered point with a parallel
structure (using the same grammatical form). Whatever you do, find an
appropriate logical structure and stick to it.

Not Written by the Right Person

Many white papers are written by people who never asked for the job and
don’t feel comfortable doing it. Sure, most product managers,
developers, or salespeople can jot down a few notes for a white paper.
But with no prior knowledge of what to include and what to leave out,
their work will likely be incomplete and not very tasty for your B2B
prospects — as though you let an inexperienced chef into the kitchen to
whip up a batch of ice cream with no idea how to do it.

Instead, find a professional writer or editor who specializes in white
papers, if possible, to write, or at least review, your white paper.
This person can be from your own company or from an outside firm. As I
discuss in Part III of this book, your marketing team should be involved
in the planning and promotion of your white paper, but not necessarily
in the production.

You’re likely better served by hiring a white paper expert from outside
to complete that stage, in close consultation with you. This approach
can save time, money, and frustration. Sure, you may already have
full-time engineers or product managers on the payroll, but surveys show
that they work much slower than experienced writers, with more false
starts, hesitation, and scrap. All the salary and overhead an employee
sinks into struggling to do a white paper can easily cost more than the
fee for an outside writer who gets down to work and finishes up quickly.

[tip.eps] Before you publish your white paper, have a professional
writer or editor review it to make sure your draft isn’t suffering from
any of the problems identified in this chapter. Doing so is like
inviting a real chef into the kitchen to taste and perfect your
concoction before you inflict it on any of your patrons.

OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 18

Ten Tips on Designing a White Paper

In This Chapter

[arrow] Making the text shine with the design of your white paper

[arrow] Thinking of your readers as you design

[arrow] Using appropriate font size, page breaks, and hyphenation

Nothing undermines a good white paper faster than poor design. No matter
how compelling and persuasive the text may be, if people can’t read it
because of a poor design, they’ll quickly move on. Then all your effort
and expense are for nothing.

In this chapter, I provide ten down-to-earth tips for anyone designing a
white paper. If you’re not sure how to design a white paper or you’ve
never done one before, read on. If you’re a marketing manager who needs
to direct a designer to format your white paper, this is for you. If
you’re a white paper writer stuck trying to use Word to turn out
respectable-looking pages, you’ve just hit pay dirt.

Design to Enhance the Content

A white paper is somewhere between a marketing piece and a scholarly
essay, so it’s quite different from anything you’ve ever designed
before. A white paper isn’t a brochure, so it shouldn’t be as slick and
colorful as one. But it needs to be more appealing than your father’s
business report. Think of a page from a magazine, like Scientific
American or Vanity Fair, or the front part of an annual report, before
all the numbers. That kind of crisp, elegant editorial design is what to
shoot for with your white paper.

As you know, the texture of your typography and the look and feel of
your pages have a powerful subliminal effect on your readers. Type too
small to read easily, awkward page breaks, and even useless hyphens (all
of which I discuss later in this chapter) give a poor impression of the
skill and attention that went into the document. If readers think your
white paper has a sloppy design, they may not even finish reading it,
and they’re much less likely to take any action based on its
recommendations.

Effective design enhances the content of the white paper instead of
drawing attention to itself. Your design must add value and clarity to
that content instead of adding distractions or hurdles to legibility.
Let the white paper’s message shine out from your pages, the same way a
fine wine glows inside a crystal goblet. The goblet doesn’t exist to
aggrandize itself; its prime purpose is to contain and showcase the
wine.

Consider Your Readers’ Eyesight

Most people’s eyes begin to change in their 40s, and they start to need
larger type to read comfortably. By coincidence, most B2B white papers
are aimed at business decision makers, most of whom are in their 40s and
older. And many people this age prefer to read on paper, so they likely
print out a white paper rather than read it on-screen. Younger
designers, take note: You’re not designing white papers for yourself and
your peers; you’re designing for older people.

That means forget gray text and color backgrounds. Black text on a white
background has been the standard for legibility for hundreds of years;
why change it? Forget 9-point type. Bump up the body size type to 10 or
11 points; it’s free. So what if your text spills to another page or
two? Forget page-long paragraphs, with every line crammed into the next.
Respect the paragraph breaks the writer used and don’t eliminate them.
Then leave a few points of white space after each paragraph to let it
breathe. And if you see a paragraph running half a page long, ask the
writer to break it into several shorter paragraphs. Give your older
readers’ eyes some relief, even if you think that makes the text look
almost comically too large.

Realize That Text Isn’t a Graphic

One crazy thing I’ve noticed about many designers — and this is
certainly crazy from a writer’s point of view — is that they treat text
like a graphic, like a photo, diagram, or block of color. They never
read it, so they don’t realize that in a white paper, the text is the
content.

Don’t just pour in the text around everything else, like it’s gray goo
that’s supposed to ooze into all the spaces between the headings and
pictures. Don’t look at a page like an industrial design, where all the
chunks need to more or less balance each other. Look at your pages as
text-driven content, where your challenge is to make the text as
inviting and easy to read or scan as in any magazine you pick up — any
magazine, mind you, aimed at people in their 40s and older.

[remember.eps] As a white paper designer, your goal is to do effective
editorial design, not display design. Display is for advertising,
packaging, Web splash pages, and retail store windows. Editorial design
is for pages to be read, like in magazines and books. Here’s a tip: Try
actually reading your pages after you design them. If that’s so hard
that you want to stop reading, take a hint and redo that page to make
the text easier to read.

Make Every Page Count

I once downloaded a white paper from a major software firm that was
almost two-thirds overhead. Seven out of 11 pages were front and back
matter, the “wrapper” around the content! Sure, every white paper needs
a little front and back matter, just like a sandwich needs two slices of
bread to hold it together, but when the front and back matter add up to
nearly two-thirds of a white paper, something is terribly wrong. It’s
like a sandwich with three pieces of bread piled on both the top and the
bottom. That makes it hard to find the actual filling, hard to chew, and
hard to digest.

One of my pet peeves is leaving a page completely blank, or even worse,
inserting a blank page covered in nothing but some theme color. Some
misguided software templates lay out a white paper like a two-sided
book, with a blank page on the back of the front cover and a back cover
to tie it all together. Forget it! Most B2B buyers either look at your
white paper on-screen or print it out single sided. Those other pages
are just a waste of time and money.

Imagine all the people printing your white paper with those extra pages.
You’ve just wasted hundreds or thousands of pieces of paper covered with
very expensive ink or toner. Even if people view your document
on-screen, you’ve still given them an empty expanse to scroll through.
And for what? Absolutely nothing of any value. So be sure to compress
the front and back matter, cut the worthless blank pages, and make every
page count.

Control Page Breaks

Another one of my pet peeves in white paper design is awkward page
breaks, such as the one in Figure 18-1. It’s as though no one was paying
any attention to the flow of the content and just dumped it mindlessly
onto the pages. Why would anyone start a major section at the very
bottom of a page, with only a line or two of text after it?

In this case, the new section is also smack up against a footnote, which
is crammed up against the footer. Isn’t all that rather jarring and
unnecessary? There’s nothing wrong with leaving a little white space at
the end of a major section. Just start the new section on a new page.
After all, your readers know how to flip a page or scroll down the
screen. They’ve been doing it for many years.

[9781118496923-fg1801.eps]

Illustration courtesy of Gordon Graham

Figure 18-1: An awkward page break.

Adding more white space and pushing the new section to the next page,
shown in Figure 18-2, makes this page look much better. That little fix
costs nothing but a few seconds of thought. But that white space gives
readers a momentary visual and mental break and helps them understand
the structure of the document.

[9781118496923-fg1802.eps]

Illustration courtesy of Gordon Graham

Figure 18-2: An improved page break.

Avoid a Wall of Gray

Some designers have the idea that a white paper is supposed to be
serious, and by that, they think “a wall of gray.” They think all they
have to do is just pour the text into the pages and be done with it. Any
white paper with text formatted as a wall of gray may look serious, but
it won’t invite anyone to read it.

[tip.eps] You can break up a wall of gray in many ways. Use the free
text enhancements — boxes, bullets, callouts, headings, lines, shading,
sidebars, tables, and so on. Look through your white paper and make sure
that nearly every page has a major visual break, such as a callout, a
graphic, a sidebar in a tinted box, or a table. And make sure that every
single page has several smaller enhancements, such as bullets or
headings. These visual breaks provide welcome eye relief for your
readers and help highlight the key messages of each page.

Leave Lots of White Space

Another symptom of the wall-of-gray approach is teensy-tiny, itsy-bitsy,
little margins around the text. It’s as though someone told the designer
that if he lets the document run any longer than six pages, he’ll be
taken out for electroshock. So the designer crams in all the text with
next to no white space at the top, bottom, or edges — breaking all the
rules of editorial design.

For example, the classic advice is to limit any horizontal line of type
to about 12 words or 66 characters max. That applies both on-screen and
on paper. Then why do some white paper designers run a line of type all
the way from one edge of the page to the other? Why do they try to
squeeze 100 or more characters into every line? Long horizontal lines of
type are hard for readers’ eyes to scan and tough for their brains to
process. If you format a white paper with minimal white space, you’ll
lose most of your readers. Again, white space is free. So what if your
final document is eight or ten pages long? If the content is compelling
and the design is inviting, your readers won’t mind.

Avoid Smug Shots

So you’re looking for a stock shot for a white paper. That’s a fine way
to break up the wall of gray. But by all means, skip the shots of the
beautiful people wearing impeccable suits hunched over a pristine PC or
shaking hands in some foyer drenched in sunlight. Everyone knows those
are fake, posed shots. Where was the last office you saw where everyone
looked like a model and dressed like royalty? Pick photos that show
average-looking people wearing typical clothes, doing something a little
more interesting than shaking hands or peering at computer screens.

For example, does your product ever get used outside? If so, try to work
in a nature shot. Does your service ever touch on transportation,
manufacturing, or healthcare? Find a photo of a giant earthmover, or
sparks flying in a factory, or a nurse tending to someone in a hospital
bed. Those settings are far more interesting than your typical “smug
shot” of beautiful people in a sunny office.

Control Hyphenation

Most software does a terrible job of hyphenating English. If you let it,
it will break words like sy-stem, Or-acle, and Ac-me. If any old-school
typographers saw those monstrosities, they’d turn over in their graves.
Traditional typography called for at least four letters before any
hyphen and at least three letters carried to the second line. Most
typographers wouldn’t hyphenate a word with fewer than six letters. So
don’t rely on automated hyphenation, and leave your text ragged right.
Then scan your right margins, and if you see a major white space that
you absolutely must eliminate, take two seconds to insert a manual
hyphen.

You can split a word by its sounds, syllables, or root words. I like to
use some combination of all three, and, if possible, create recognizable
root words by inserting optional hyphens. For example, in the word
thankfully, the most sensible places to put a hyphen are thank-fully or
thankful-ly. This simple tactic builds readability instead of tearing it
down with meaningless breaks like than-kfully or thankf-ully.

[warning_bomb.eps] Never break the name of your company or any of your
products with a hyphen. That leads to horrors such as Ac-me or
ScanO-Matic. That’s just not done. Most software has a way for you to
include those words on a list of terms that are never hyphenated.

Refine a Corporate Template

Some companies have a corporate template that they expect all designers
to follow. These layouts may be perfect for a press release, an internal
business report, or a data sheet, but they’re not always ideal for a
white paper. Some of the guidelines I dispense in this chapter may
conflict directly with the official company template. Then what? Well,
standards do evolve, and they can be changed.

[tip.eps] If you feel strongly that the corporate template detracts from
the readability and undermines the white paper content, make your views
known. If you have the scope, make up two versions of the white paper:
one following the existing template and another with your recommended
changes. Circulate both versions to your team, your customer advisory
board, and your manager. Look into the research on readability. Get a
second opinion from an experienced designer or a white paper expert. Ask
me; I’ll be happy to give you my two cents’ worth. I hope good sense and
good taste prevail and your corporate template is refined to present
your white paper in the best possible format.

OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 19

More Than Ten Ways to Spice Up a White Paper Title

In This Chapter

[arrow] Understanding why titles are critical for white paper success

[arrow] Using titles and subtitles effectively

[arrow] Incorporating job titles, questions, and numbers in white paper
titles

[arrow] Checking keywords and titles in advance

Your white paper title can make or break it. Think of your title as the
menu listing for an ice-cream sundae. Which item would you likely order:
“chocolate sundae with fudge sauce” or “Chocolate Mountain Volcano with
Hot Fudge Lava”? Me, I’m climbing that mountain!

In the same way, you must add a little flair to your white paper title.
As you know, B2B buyers routinely do their own research and scan pages
of search results to find useful information. Your white paper title is
often all that prospects have to go on to make their decision about
whether to download or read your white paper. If your title falls flat,
they’ll skip right past it, meaning that all the effort you put into
creating that document was a waste. Anything you can do to make your
title more compelling to your target audience can have a dramatic effect
on your white paper’s success.

Consider this extremely ho-hum title for a white paper:

“Roundup of Advanced Capabilities of Late-Model Scanners: A White Paper
from Acme Software”

Would you download that? Not likely. In this chapter, I show you ten (or
so) possible ways to strengthen such a weak title and help your white
paper succeed.

Stressing the Benefits to Readers

Almost anyone who sees your white paper title in a list of search
results asks, “Why should I spend my valuable time reading this? What’s
in it for me?” Why not tell your readers explicitly what they’ll gain
from reading your white paper, right in your title? That’s probably the
single best way to strengthen a weak white paper title. If you don’t, do
you expect them to read between the lines or use their psychic powers to
intuit your intentions?

The classic business benefits that interest most executives include

[check.png] Making money

[check.png] Saving money

[check.png] Saving labor

[check.png] Cutting waste

[check.png] Streamlining processes

[check.png] Eliminating processes

[check.png] Any other way to “run lean and mean” or “do more with less”

The classic technical benefits that interest executives include

[check.png] Automating processes

[check.png] Controlling IT costs

[check.png] Avoiding mistakes or rework

[check.png] Overcoming constraints or trade-offs

[check.png] Linking smoothly with existing systems

[check.png] Any other way to contribute to the company’s strategic
objectives instead of just “keeping the lights on”

Here are two possible new titles, one highlighting business benefits and
the other a key technical benefit:

“Save Time and Money with Today’s New Generation of Scanners”

“Automate Your Filing with Today’s New Generation of Scanners”

Using Active Verbs, Not Passive Labels

Our boring title is a passive label, full of bland nouns and ho-hum
adjectives that just sit there like a frozen lump of fat, sugar, and
chemicals. You need to add some heat and deliciousness with active verbs
that propel your title up the list of search engine results. Here are
two possible improvements, using more active verbs:

“Saving Time and Money with Unattended Scanning”

“Slaying the Paper-Burden Monster with Automated Filing”

[tip.eps] Notice how both examples start with a verb gerund that ends in
-ing. This tried-and-true format suggests taking action in the present.
Don’t project your readers into the future or drag them back to the past
with your verb endings. After all, there’s no time like the present:
Carpe diem!

Identifying Your Target Reader

Naming your target audience by a specific job title helps B2B buyers see
whether your white paper is truly aimed at them. The simplest way to add
a job title is to use a subtitle, as in “A Special Report for CFOs.” You
can even work in two job titles if you’re careful, as in “A Special
Report for IT and Finance Executives.” In this case, always list your
primary audience first and your secondary one last.

[warning_bomb.eps] Never try to address more than two different roles,
or your title starts to sound pretty clumsy. If you have three distinct
audience segments, you may be better off creating three separate
“clones” of the same basic content, tweaked to include suitable jargon
for each role. Then show the appropriate job title for each version of
your document, as in the following examples:

“A Special Report for IT Executives”

“A Special Report for Finance Executive”

“A Special Report for HR Executives”

Converting a Weak Title to a Subtitle

What if your boss or some high-powered reviewer wants to use a title
that you think isn’t effective? Will all your hard work come to naught
because of a few ill-chosen words on the white paper cover? Thankfully,
a simple solution exists: Knock down the weaker title to a subtitle, and
insert your more powerful wording as the main title. That way, everyone
ends up more or less happy.

Consider the weak title “The Scans Have It.” This title provides no
benefit to the reader, no active verbs, no target job title, no
connection to much of anything at all. But suppose your VP loves that
title, and there’s no talking him out of it. Simply knock that title
down to the subtitle and put something far more effective in front of
it, perhaps something like this:

“Saving Time and Money with Today’s New Generation of Scanners: The
Scans Have It”

If you’re lucky, your target readers will click on your title before
they even notice those final words.

Why Not Try a Question?

Don’t you love a good question in a white paper title? Isn’t that an
intriguing way to challenge readers? Can you ever go wrong with a
question for a title? I could go on, right? But you get the point, eh?
Turning a weak title into a question can give it an engaging twist:

“Is Your Firm Getting Crushed by Paper Burden?”

“Today’s New Generation of Scanners: Are They Up to Snuff?”

“Are Competitors Eating Your Lunch with Automated Scanning?”

Recasting Your Paper As a Numbered List

Any number sounds more precise than any qualifier. “I had a temperature
of 103” sounds more scientific than “I was burning up from a really bad
fever.” See if you can think of some way to work a number into your
title.

Of course, if you plan all along to write a numbered list, the title
will simply fall into your lap like a gift. If, instead, you find
yourself with a boring title and a ho-hum document done in another
flavor, you may be able to recast it as a numbered list mash-up. Think
about all the commonplace patterns that occur in everyday life as well
as pop culture: three coins in the fountain, four strong winds, five
easy pieces, six feet under, seven deadly sins. Even if you didn’t plan
it that way, you may be able to reorganize your white paper around a set
of numbers that give it new vigor. Doing so can involve some rewriting,
but it can pay off with a much more compelling document. Consider titles
like these:

“4 Little-Known Ways to Save Time with Automated Scanning”

“5 Benefits of Today’s Fifth-Generation Scanners”

“6 Tips on Unattended Scanning and Automated Filing”

Using “How to” Phrasing

Western civilization, and especially America, is a can-do society that
values know-how. Just try Googling the phrase how to to see the
popularity of this little phrase; I got more than 3.5 billion hits! You
can insert “how to” in front of almost any phrase and see that it works
just fine. After all, your white paper is supposed to help readers learn
how to understand an issue, solve a problem, or make a decision. Here
are a couple examples:

“How to Save Time and Money with Today’s New Generation of Scanners”

“How to Gain from Unattended Scanning and Automated Filing”

Leaving Out Product Names

Unless you’re writing a backgrounder to explain the features and
benefits of a particular offering, never use a product name in the title
of your white paper. Including a product name in a white paper title
will cut downloads by 50 percent or more. Why? Because a product name in
the title makes your white paper sound like a sales piece that won’t
give B2B buyers the useful information they’re seeking. They’re not
ready to evaluate your product; first they want to understand the issue.
For a problem/solution flavor, name the problem with the promise of
overcoming it, as in the following:

“Slaying the Profit-Sucking Monster of Paper Burden”

What if your VP of Sales insists on including a product name, in the
misguided belief that anyone out there cares? If you fight this battle
and lose, the best approach is to knock down the product name to a
subtitle. Make sure to give the product name right at the end of the
subtitle to de-emphasize it to the max:

“Slaying the Profit-Sucking Monster of Paper Burden: A Special Report on
the Acme ScanOMatic 3000”

Cutting Out Jargon and Buzzwords

Many sales and marketing people love jargon, but you know better, right?
Although some B2B buyers no doubt Google an occasional buzzword, many
more are searching for helpful content about an actual problem they’re
facing. Loading up your title with say-nothing buzzwords won’t help your
white paper stand out from the crowd. I highly recommend that you drop
the jargon and find a fresher approach, using any of the other tips in
this chapter. For example, suppose you find yourself dealing with a
white paper title that sounds something like this:

“Best-of-Breed Enterprise-Class Automated Filing with Seamless
Integration of Fifth-Generation Scanning”

You know you have some tinkering to do. When you cut out the buzzwords,
you’re left with these remains:

“Automated Filing with Fifth-Generation Scanning”

That’s actually an okay start for a title. Pump it up with some
benefits, the job title you’re aiming at, and an industry problem, and
you can transform it into a reasonably effective title:

“Automate Your Filing with Today’s New Generation of Scanners: A Special
Report for Insurance Brokers Drowning in Paper”

Using Selected Keywords

In your title, try to work in the keywords that you think your target
readers are searching for. If you believe they’re going to look for
unattended scanning or automated filing, make sure to include those
terms in your title. Doing so will propel your white paper into their
search engine results, higher up in the list. On the other hand, if
those terms aren’t yet popular, use whatever synonyms your ideal readers
are most likely to use. Choose the most popular terms that you can but
always craft your title to sound as natural as possible.

[tip.eps] Not sure what people are searching for? Check the popularity
of various search terms with Google’s free AdWords Keyword Tool; just
Google that tool name to get the current location. You don’t need to be
an AdWords customer to use this tool. In just a few seconds, you can
test out any keywords, get many suggestions for related keywords and
synonyms, and check the popularity of all your possibilities.

Testing Titles in Advance

Whatever you think of a white paper title, the ultimate test is up to
your target audience. To improve your odds, try out some proposed titles
on your ideal readers in advance. Where do you find them? Does your
company have a Customer Advisory Board or user group? If so, this group
is an ideal forum for generating white paper ideas and testing titles.
Is there an industry event coming up that lots of your customers plan to
attend? That’s a great time to gather some of them together over coffee
or lunch. Are you in touch with any customers on a regular basis? Why
not e-mail a select group of them a shortlist of possible white paper
names, and ask them which one would attract their attention best?

Even better, create a set of multiple covers with the same look but a
different title for each. Then ask which one they’d most likely
download. If one emerges as the clear favorite from this testing, use
it. If not, consider going back to the drawing board and tweaking your
suggestions some more.

[remember.eps] Your title is one of the most important parts of your
white paper. It’s worth spending time on some variations, testing it out
on sample readers, and using these tips to help make it as strong as
possible. If great numbers of your ideal readers find, download, and
read your white paper, your title is clearly doing its job. If not, try
again. There’s no law against tweaking a title and republishing the very
same white paper again.

OceanofPDF.com

[IFC_top]

To access the cheat sheet specifically for this book, go to
www.dummies.com/cheatsheet/whitepapers.

[IFC_bottom]

Find out "HOW" at Dummies.com

OceanofPDF.com
