[]

[]

[]

Writing That Works

Third Edition

How to communicate effectively in business:

e-mail

letters

memos

presentations

plans

reports

proposals

resumes

speeches

Kenmeth Roman and Joel Raphaelson

OceanofPDF.com

If language is not correct,

then what is said is not what is meant;

If what is said is not what is meant,

Then what ought to be done remains undone.

—CONFUCIUS

OceanofPDF.com

Contents

Epigraph

Preface: Why a Third Edition?

1. Writing That Works

2. Don’t Mumble—and Other Principles of Effective

Writing

3. “I Love My Computer”

4. E-mail—the Great Mailbox in the Sky

5. Memos and Letters That Get Things Done

6. Writing for an Audience: Presentations and Speeches

7. Plans and Reports That Make Things Happen

8. Recommendations and Proposals That Sell Ideas

9. Asking for Money: Sales and Fund-Raising Letters

10. Coping with Political Correctness

11. Writing a Resume—and Getting an Interview

12. Editing Yourself

13. Making It Easy to Read

Other Books That Will Help You Write Better

Acknowledgments

About the Author

Praise for

Writing That Works, 3rd Edition

Previous Books

Copyright

About the Publisher

OceanofPDF.com

Preface Why a Third Edition?

The first edition of this book was written on a typewriter; we delivered
a typed manuscript to the publisher. We wrote the second edition on
computers and delivered a printed manuscript. This edition was written
on computers and e-mailed to our editor—no manuscript, not even disks.

That illustrates one of the changes in the way people communicate that
propelled us to undertake a thorough revision. E-mail has become so
ubiquitous that we added a chapter and revised several others to take
full account of its influence. Another change in recent years is the
fading of the internal memo — displaced in many uses by e-mail, in
others by the presentation “deck.”

Our purpose, however, remains unchanged. We wrote the book to help those
millions of nonprofessional writers who must use the written word to get
results — in business, in government, in education, in the arts. That’s
still our goal.

Nor have we found any cause to abandon the principles we espouse.

To the contrary, the speed and ease of e-mail and word processing serve
as an invitation to sloppy writing. Replacing paper with a PC

screen doesn’t change the need for clear, precise communication. And
replacing a formal memo with a bullet-pointed presentation deck doesn’t
justify loose thinking.

In the second edition, we introduced some thoughts on how to avoid the
pitfalls of sexist language. We have expanded those thoughts into a
separate chapter on political correctness — and the extent to which it
should or should not influence the way you write.

Throughout the book, we have freshened examples and sharpened points by
practicing what we preach about editing. Coming from a

world of thirty-second commercials has trained us to cut to the essence

— and helped keep this book slim and our message accessible.

Nothing that follows is academic or theoretical. You will find advice
you can act on, whenever you have to convert empty screen or blank paper
into a letter, a memo, a report, a recommendation, a proposal, a speech,
a resume. You’ll get help from specific side-by-side examples of good
writing versus bad.

“Generations ago the telephone killed the art of executive writing.

Now it’s poised for a comeback,” reports The Wall Street Journal, noting
that e-mail sends everyone to a keyboard. No wonder companies institute
writing courses.

Effective writing is hard work even for the best writers (and even on a
computer), but the principles are simple. They don’t require unusual
talent or special skills. They are easy to understand and easy to put
into use. What you do need is a degree of determination — the
perseverance to be sure you’ve said what you want to say. This book aims
to help you do that with less difficulty and more confidence, and get
the results you’re looking for — from everything you write.

OceanofPDF.com

1 Writing That Works

“Too many of the communications I get are meaningless,” observes a
leading CEO. “They don’t help me understand what action the writer wants
me to take. They waste my time.”

We could fill a dozen pages with complaints of this sort. “Unclear,
poorly written, or confusing” is the verdict of vice presidents of two
hundred major U.S. companies on a full third of the business writing
they confront. New York’s Commissioner of Education, frustrated that so
many of the letters and memos passing through his office were
“confusing” or “did not answer questions quickly enough,” ordered his
250 top officials to take a course in writing. And so it goes. It adds
up to a chorus of laments that so few people can put a thought into
words that make it clear, state it precisely, and take no more of the
reader’s time than is called for.

Yet clarity, desirable as it is, is not the goal. The goal is effective
communication — writing that works.

What does the reader need to know to comprehend your report and endorse
its conclusions? To approve your plan, and pay for it? To respond
swiftly to your e-mail? To send money for your charity, your candidate,
your product or service? To invite you to a job interview? To make the
right business decision?

You’re not likely to get the results you seek if your writing is murky,
long-winded, bogged down by jargon, and topsyturvy in its order of
thought. Just as unproductive is what two Stanford professors, Jeffrey
Pfeffer and Robert I. Sutton, call “smart talk.” Writing in the Harvard
Business Review in 1999, the professors identify smart talk as a major
obstacle to taking action in business. A characteristic of smart talk is
that it is unnecessarily complicated or abstract (or both). People
seldom act on what they cannot understand. Good results are even less
likely if you flood

the reader with information that isn’t organized to lead to an action or
isn’t relevant to a grasp of the subject.

Even the federal government is starting to recognize the benefits of
simple, clear writing. The Securities and Exchange Commission
inaugurated the plain-language movement by ordering mutual fund
companies to rewrite their prospectuses. The Veterans Benefits
Administration trained employees in its insurance division how to write
more clearly, and the response rate to its letters increased — saving
the agency $500,000 a year.

Companies are seeing how confusing communication ties up their service
centers, and how clear communications makes them more efficient and
competitive.

One executive suggests a discipline — putting down first what you want
the reader to do, next the three most important things the reader needs
to understand to take that action, then starting to write. When you’re
done, he suggests asking yourself whether if you were the reader, would
you take action on the basis of what is written.

OceanofPDF.com

People who write well do well

To get action from busy people, your writing must cut through to the
heart of the matter. It must require a minimum of time and effort on the
reader’s part. The importance of this increases with the importance of
your reader. At any level, readers are likely to be swamped either with
paperwork or a twenty-four-hour-a-day stream of e-mail, or both. Junior
executives may feel obliged to plow through everything that comes their
way. The president doesn’t — and damned well won’t.

A senior executive says this about a client:

His desk is usually absolutely clean, but I know that somewhere in that
man’s life there’s a tremendous pile of paper. If I want him to read the
memo himself, I’d better get right to the point and I’d better be clear,
or he’ll just pass it along to somebody else, with a testy little note
asking for a translation.

The better you write, the less time your boss must spend rewriting your
stuff. If you are ambitious, it won’t hurt to make life easier for
people above you. Bad writing slows things down; good writing speeds
them up.

The only way some people know you is through your writing. It can be
your most frequent point of contact, or your only one, with people
important to your career — major customers, senior clients, your own top
management. To those women and men, your writing is you. It reveals how
your mind works. Is it forceful or fatuous, deft or clumsy, crisp or
soggy?

Readers who don’t know you judge you from the evidence in your writing.

Their judgment of you specifically includes the evidence you give them
in the e-mail you dash off. It comes as a surprise to many people that
readers of e-mail do not abandon their standards just because they are
looking at a screen rather than a piece of paper.

“Because it’s just e-mail,” says Christie Hefner, CEO of Playboy
Enterprises, “people think they don’t have to be grammatical or spell
things right or take the trouble to write well. It’s very annoying.”

Slapdash comes across as slapdash, wordy as wordy, and poor spelling and
grammar as signs of ignorance or sloppiness.

It is best to stick to standard English usage and to observe the
conventions of spelling and punctuation. We advise this not out of
academic fussiness but from observing how things are. If you write
“it’s” with an apostrophe to signify the possessive of “it” (wrong),
instead of the contraction of “it is” (right), not all readers will
detect your lapse. But those who do may be the ones who count. There
still seems to be some correlation between literacy and seniority.

Important matters are usually examined in writing — either in a paper to
be studied privately, or in a formal presentation. It isn’t enough that
you know all about your subject. You must make yourself clear to
somebody who has only a fraction of your expertise. Above all, you must
express your point of view persuasively. We have seen hundreds of papers
that assert a point of view with energetic enthusiasm, but astonishingly
few that make a persuasive case. Often enough the case itself is a good
one. But the writer self-destructs in any or all of the ways we go into
later on.

“It is an immutable law of business,” said the former head of ITT,
Harold Geneen, “that words are words, promises are promises, but only
performance is reality.” By itself, good writing is no guarantee of
success.

But words are more than words, and poor performance can often be traced
to poor communication. Your ability to write persuasively can help you
get things done and arrive at your goal — today, this month, or during
the decades of your career.

OceanofPDF.com

Making time to write well

Writing better does not mean writing more. There is paper enough in our
lives now — despite the computer and e-mail — and precious little time
to read it. This book suggests some of the ways that improving your
writing can save time for other people. But what about your time? While
you respect the time of others, you must also protect your own.

It takes time to write well. People are wrong when they say there are
only twenty-four hours in a day, observes management guru Peter Drucker
—

there are actually only two, perhaps three, that you can use
productively, and the difference between busy executives and effective
ones is how they use that time. Effective means picking your spots,
concentrating your energies on a major document or project or speech
that will make a difference.

The biggest time waster is shuffling things from one pile to another
while you drown in a sea of indecision. Effective executives try to
handle paper only once — hard to do, but it works. They delete or
respond to e-mail on the spot. They decide quickly whether to answer,
file, or toss out. They respond to easy matters instantly — by return
e-mail or through comments written directly on letters and memos and
returned at once. Or send short handwritten notes (or e-notes) of
direction, praise, or criticism.

Major papers, on the other hand, require study. Read them actively, get
to the principal arguments, and decide what must be done. Consider a

“maturing file” for knotty problems. Many disappear if given time.
Others call for more thought.

There is no rule that says you must answer or file everything that is
sent to you. Fortune columnist Stewart Alsop became so swamped with the
flood of e-mail that he first stopped responding to every message, then
stopped reading them all. His reasoning:

The fact that someone sends me a message does not automatically impose
an obligation on my part to respond. If that were true, then it would
logically follow that I should allow strangers to rule my life. I

don’t like that idea. So I’ve started to delete messages without reading
them first.

This kind of discipline sets aside the time for the truly important as
opposed to the merely urgent. It helps you clear the decks — at the
office or at home — for the jobs that really matter. High among them
will be major pieces that you write.

The rest of this book provides specific advice on skills and techniques
that will help you put whatever time you spend on writing to good use.

Implicit on every page is the idea — the truth — that the ultimate
time-saver is effective communication.

OceanofPDF.com

2 Don’t Mumble - and Other Principles of

Effective Writing

When God wanted to stop the people from building the Tower of Babel, he
did not smite them down with a thunderbolt. He said: “… let us go down,
and there confound their language, that they may not understand one
another’s speech.”

He could think of no surer way to keep the tower unbuilt than to garble
communications. While the Lord confounded language on purpose, humans do
it inadvertently — albeit with similar results. The suggestions in this
chapter will help you avoid that fate for your own towers, whatever they
may be.

OceanofPDF.com

Above all, don’t mumble

Once you’ve decided what you want to say, come right out and say it.

Mumblers command less attention than people who speak up. Keep in mind
E. B. White’s sobering injunction: “When you say something, make sure
you have said it. The chances of your having said it are only fair.”

Instead of this …

… say

this

It is generally desirable to communicate your thoughts in a Don’t
forthright manner.

mumble.

Toning your point down and tiptoeing around it may, in many
circumstances, tempt the reader to tune out and allow his mind to
wander.

Here are some more suggestions:

1. Make the organization of your writing clear

Most people “write badly because they cannot think clearly,” observed H.
L. Mencken. The reason they cannot think clearly, he went on, is that

“they lack the brains.” We dare to assume that you, as a reader of this
book, are brainy enough to think clearly. You know how to organize your
thoughts into a coherent order. Now you must make that organization
clear to the reader.

When you write anything longer than a few paragraphs, start by telling
the reader where you are going.

The committee proposes that the company invest $1 million in a library.

First you must know where you are going yourself. Make an outline of
your major points, placing supporting details in their proper position.
Then,

in your paper, use your outline to signal the major points for your
reader.

Underline and number each important section heading. This serves the
same purpose as chapter titles in a book.

End with a summary. And keep in mind that a summary is not a conclusion.
Your summary should introduce no new ideas; it should summarize, as
briefly as possible, the most important points you have made.

If your paper comes to a conclusion — the point of your case — your
summary should summarize that too, to fix the essentials of your message
in your reader’s mind.

Summary: Make an outline; use your outline to help your reader; number
and underline section headings; summarize.

Note: Some lengthy documents start with a summary, often called

“Executive Summary.” The same principles apply.

2. Use short paragraphs, short sentences — and short words Three major
articles start at the top of the front page of every issue of The Wall
Street Journal. The first paragraphs of these articles are never more
than three sentences long. Many paragraphs contain only a single
sentence.

The first sentences themselves are crisp and compact: It all began to
crumble the afternoon Mom’s Best Cookies, Inc., fired Mom.

The cult of James Dean was fostered by his early death, and it didn’t
hurt his hometown any.

It’s official — Wall Street is declaring war on sexism.

By contrast, here is an example of the kind of mumbling first sentence
that confronts people in their office reading:

This provides the Argus, Mitchell & Dohn perspective on a consumers'-eye
view of the current position and growth potential of Blake’s Tea and
Jones’s Tea, the major entries of National Beverages in the English tea
market.

The Wall Street Journal is broadly read — beyond business and Wall
Street. Readers and editors alike give much of the credit to its
readability.

Journal editors have put into practice this simple principle: Short
sentences and short paragraphs are easier to read than long ones. And
easier to understand.

As for short words, you don’t have to turn your back on the riches and
subtleties of the English language. Nobody will excoriate you for using
a long word whose precise meaning no shorter word duplicates. But prefer
the short word to the long one that means the same thing: Prefer this…

…to this

Now

Currently

Start

Initiate

Show

Indicate

Finish

Finalize

Speed up, move along Expedite

Use

Utilize

Place, put

Position

Reliance on long words, which are often more abstract than common short
ones, can be a sign that you have not worked out exactly what you want
to say. If you have distilled your thinking to its essence, you will
probably be able to express it in simple words.

Here is how George Bernard Shaw, in his days as a music critic,
described his startled response to a new work: “I did with my ears what
I do with my eyes when I stare.” Once Shaw had figured out what his
unusual reaction had been, he was able to describe it in words of one
syllable.

Shakespeare expressed the deepest emotion in the simplest words. Says
King Lear on the brutal murder of his beloved Fool: “And my poor fool is
hang’d. No, no, no life! Why should a dog, a horse, a rat, have life,
and thou no breath at all? Thou’ll come no more. Never, never, never,
never!”

The Reader’s Digest once published an article on the power of short
words. The last sentence pointed out, to the surprise of most readers,
that no

word in the eloquent three-page essay had more than one syllable.

3. Make your writing active — and personal

Good writers choose the active voice over the passive voice whenever
possible — and it’s possible most of the time. Active verbs add energy
to your writing. That’s why they’re called active.

This simple practice also improves your writing by making it more
personal, a human being talking rather than an institution. The passive
voice hides who is speaking or taking action; the active voice reveals
it.

Passive, impersonal

Active, personal

It is recommended

We recommend

He should be told

Get Alice to tell him

Personal sacrifices are being made,

We see people making

although the degree of participation is

sacrifices. How many

not absolutely identifiable.

people? We can’t say for

sure.

A lot of business writing mumbles along in the passive voice because
high school English teachers told us not to start sentences with “I”
without the first person singular (preferring “the cookies were eaten by
me” to “I ate the cookies.”) But there are plenty of good ways to
substitute active for passive verbs.

Here is a typical passive construction — followed by active
alternatives.

It is respectfully requested that you send a representative to our

conference.

All of us here hope that you’ll send a representative Won’t you please
send a representative …

Somebody representing your company would add a lot …

Will you give serious thought to sending a representative?

You can see how much a representative from your company would contribute
…

Without a representative from your company, our conference would be a
fizzle …

You might protest that these alternatives don’t all say quite the same
thing. Exactly so. Yet another advantage of the active voice is that it
tends to push you to decide precisely what you want to say, to be more
specific.

4. Avoid vague adjectives and adverbs

A memo complains that the unfortunate outcome of some project “was
reasonably unexpected.” Reasonably? How unexpected is that? Or does the
writer mean that a reasonable person would not have expected such an
outcome at all? Depending on the intention, it would be a lot less vague
to write:

Few of us expected this outcome.

Or,

Although I didn’t expect this outcome, it didn’t come as a complete
surprise.

State your meaning precisely:

Vague

Precise

Very overspent

Overspent by $10,000

Slightly behind schedule One day late Some authorities advise weeding
out adjectives and adverbs as a matter of principle. We don’t.
Adjectives and adverbs are parts of speech, often indispensable to
precise expression. But we do distinguish between lazy ones and vigorous
ones. The lazy ones are so overused in some contexts that they have
become clichés:

Very good

Great success

Awfully nice

Richly deserved

Basically accurate Vitally important By contrast, vigorous adjectives
and adverbs sharpen your point: Instantly accepted Tiny raise

Rudely turned down Moist handshake Short meeting

Tiresome speech

Crisp presentation Black coffee Baffling instructions Lucid
recommendation Choose adjectives and adverbs that make your meaning more
precise.

Do not use them as mere exclamation points.

5. Use down-to-earth language

The pervasive use of professional jargon arises more out of fear than
arrogance, hypothesizes Harvard paleontologist Dr. Stephan Jay Gould,
author of nineteen books. “Most young scholars slip into this jargon
because they are afraid that, if they don’t, their mentors or the people
who promote them won’t think they are serious. I can’t believe that
anyone would want to write that way.”

Avoid technical or business jargon. There is always a simple,
down-to-earth word that says the same thing as the showoff fad word or
vague abstraction. A leading offender in recent years is “proactive” —
supposedly indicating the opposite of “reactive.” What’s wrong with
“active,” a real word? Or, for more emphasis, “take the initiative.”

Then there’s “off-line,” as in “Let’s go off-line on that subject.” What
they mean is, “Let’s discuss that separately, outside the meeting.”

“Reengineering” seems to be here to stay — in contexts that have nothing
to do with engineers. Anything that’s changed in any way is likely to be
described as “reengineered.” We might even have said, without raising
eyebrows in trendy circles, that we “reengineered” this book. What we
did say — that we expanded the book and updated it — may stir you less
but tells you more.

The use of this kind of language became the target of an office game
called Buzzword Bingo. The game is played in meeting rooms across the

country. Players surreptitiously track the jargon spouted by their
bosses, hoping to be the first in the room to fill out a bingo-like card
listing the company’s prevailing buzzwords. A discreet cough, rather
than a shout of Bingo! , announces the winner.

We often urge people to write the way they talk. But developments like
Buzzword Bingo indicate a perverse trend: More and more people in
business seem to be talking the way they write. In the box on the next
page, there are some words and phrases that might appear on Buzzword
Bingo cards, followed by down-to-earth alternatives.

Buzzword

Down-to-earth

English

To interface

Discuss, meet,

work with

To impact

To affect, to do

to

Modality

Style, method

Not enough

Resource constrained

people (or

money)

Incent

Motivate

Skill set

Skills, abilities

Solution set

Solutions

Resultful

Effective,

achieve results

Meaningful

Real, actual,

tangible

Judgmentally

I think

Net net

Conclusion

Suboptimal

Less than ideal

Push the envelope

Test the limits

Scope down (from microscope)

Look at more

closely

Scope out (from telescope)

Take a long view

Workshopping

Trying out,

working on

NOTE: Popular usage has confused parameters with perimeter. If you mean
limits, say limits.

What’s wrong with jargon like this becomes obvious when it comes at you
in clusters, which is just how it tends to arrive: Jargon

Down-to-earth English

It is believed that with the parameters that We believe that the limits
have been imposed by your management, your management set may a viable
program may be hard to evolve. rule out an effective Net net: If our
program is to impact the

program. If we expect to

consumer to the optimum, meaningful

reach our goal, we’d better

interface with your management may be

ask your management to

necessitated.

listen to our case.

The kind of writing on the left is long-winded and heavy-handed. It is
what E. B. White calls “the language of mutilation” — it mutilates your
meaning. The language on the right is clear and direct. It illuminates
your meaning.

6. Be specific

A fatal weakness in much business writing is the overuse of
generalities. The writer has something specific in mind, but doesn’t
actually write it. The reader is left to guess. Friendly readers may
guess sympathetically, but a neutral or skeptical reader will remain
uninformed, unimpressed, and unpersuaded.

The first draft of a letter reporting to financial backers on a series
of educational seminars in Wyoming said:

Our adult program was a great success. We attracted more students from
more places than ever before.

The reader, not knowing whether the increase in students was one or a
hundred and lacking any other specific information, must take the
generalized claim of success on faith. When rewritten, the letter said:

Our enrollment doubled to 560. Students came from Wyoming and
twenty-seven other states, and from Germany and Canada.

There can now be no doubt about the success of the program. The
specifics speak for themselves.

7. Choose the right word

Know the precise meaning of every word you use. Here are some words that
many people confuse:

Effect can mean a result (noun)

To affect something is to have an

or to bring about (verb): The

influence on it: The new program

effect of the new program on the

affects only the clerical staff.

morale of the drivers will be

zero; it effects no change outside

the clerical staff.

Its is the possessive form of “it.”

No apostrophe. Its profits grow

It’s is the contraction of “it is.” It’s year after year. A bit of
doggerel vital that profits keep growing.

may help: “Sin must prosper or

it’s bored, while virtue is its own

reward.”

i.e. (id est) means “that is”: He e.g. (exempli gratia) means “for

preferred short names; i.e., nothing example”: He gave all his longer
than four letters.

products short names; e.g., Hit,

Miss, Duck, Dive.

Principal is the first in rank or

Principle is a guiding rule: Our

importance: Our principal problem principle is to use our own is lack of
cash flow.

money rather than to borrow.

Imply means to suggest indirectly: Infer means to draw meaning out Her
report implies that she will

of something: The assistant

soon promote her assistant.

infers from her report that he will

soon be promoted.

Mitigate means to lessen in force

Militate means to have force as

or intensity: She mitigated the bad evidence usually in a case against
news by giving everybody the

something: The bad news

afternoon off.

militates against an early end to

the raise freeze.

Gratuitous means unasked for,

Grateful, gratitude. You know

excessive: He had done his job to

what these words mean. The

perfection for years. The advice

point here is that they have no

from the newcomer was

connection with gratuitous.

gratuitous.

Foreword. Something that comes Forward. Moving ahead, as in first. A
preface.

forward, march!

Appraise means to measure, to

Apprise means to inform in

assess the value or nature of

detail: The chief of staff apprised

something: The general appraised the colonels of the general’s the
enemy’s strength before

appraisal of the situation.

ordering the attack.

Fortuitous means happening by

Fortunate means favored by good chance, accidental. Being seated fortune
— lucky.

next to his ex-wife was fortuitous

— but hardly fortunate.

Alternate (verb) means to go back

and forth from one to another: The Alternative refers to a choice coach
alternated between passing among two or more possibilities: plans and
running plans. As noun The coach faced the alternatives or adjective, it
carries the same

— go for the first down and

sense: Mike and Jim are the coach’s possible victory, or punt to
alternates; they play on alternate

preserve the tie.

sets of downs.

Definite is most often used to mean Definitive means complete and
positive, absolutely certain; It is

authoritative, determining once

now definite that the factory will

and for all: It was the definitive

open on schedule.

design for a steel mill, a model

for all others.

Indifferent means that you don’t

Disinterested is not the same as

care how it comes out: The

“uninterested.” It means neutral

and objective: Amid the passions

chairman, recognizing the triviality raging on both sides, only the of
the proposal, was indifferent. chairman, recognizing the importance of
the decision,

managed to remain disinterested.

Fulsome means excessive to the

Full, abundant are in no way

point of insincerity: His fulsome

synonymous with fulsome. They

praise was a transparent attempt at carry their own familiar flattery.

meanings.

Notorious means famous in an

Notable means worthy of note: His unsavory way: Jack the Ripper research
on Jack the Ripper is

was perhaps the most notorious

notable for its thoroughness.

criminal of the nineteenth

century.

Into must be handled with caution. In to is not synonymous with The
headline writer wrote, murder into. You go into the house, or suspects
turn themselves into police you go in to find your wallet. You

— stunning as magic, but not what look into the subject before you he
meant. When the preposition

hand your paper in to your boss.

belongs to the verb — “to turn in” The rules are too complicated to

— you can’t use into.

help. Be alert to the difference

and use your ear.

When you confuse words like these, your reader may conclude that you
don’t know any better. Illiteracy does not breed respect.

8. Make it perfect

No typos, no misspellings, no errors in numbers or dates. If your
writing is slipshod in any of these ways, however minor they may seem to
you, a reader who spots your errors may justifiably question how much
care and thought you have put into it.

Spelling is a special problem. Good spellers are an intolerant lot, and
your reader could be among them. Whenever you are in doubt about how a
word is spelled, look it up in the dictionary. If you are an incurably
bad speller, make sure your drafts get checked by someone who isn’t thus

handicapped. Computer spell checkers can help, but they have serious
shortcomings (as demonstrated poetically in Chapter 3).

9. Come to the point

Churchill could have mumbled that “the situation in regard to France is
very serious.” What he did say was, “The news from France is bad.”

An executive mumbled in his report, “Capacity expansion driven by the
sales growth encountered engineering issues which adversely impacted
profits.” What he was trying to say is, “Profits are off because
engineering problems hurt our ability to increase production as fast as
sales.”

Take the time to boil down what you want to say, and express it
confidently in simple, declarative sentences. Remember the man who
apologized for writing such a long letter, explaining that he didn’t
have time to write a short one.

There are only 266 words in the Gettysburg Address. The shortest
sentence in the New Testament may be the most moving: “Jesus wept.”

10. Write simply and naturally — the way (we hope) you talk One office
worker meets another in the hall. “Ben,” he says. “If you need more
manuals, just ask for them.” His ten-word message delivers his thought
simply and directly. Anyone can understand. What more is there to say?

But let the same man write the message, and he pads it with lots of big
words. Here’s the way the written message actually appeared.

Should the supply of manuals sent you not be sufficient to meet your
requirements, application should be made to this office for additional
copies.

A message needing ten words and eleven syllables is now twenty-four
words with thirty-nine syllables, heavy reading, and sounds pompous.

Most Americans are taught that the written language and the spoken
language are entirely different. They learn to write in a stiff, formal
style and to steer clear of anything that sounds natural and colloquial.

Stiff

Natural

The reasons are fourfold There are four reasons Importantly

The important point is

Visitation

Visit

Notice how often somebody will say “It sounds just like her” in praise
of some particularly effective writing. What you write should sound just
like you talking when you’re at your best — when your ideas flow swiftly
and in good order, when your syntax is smooth, your vocabulary accurate,
and afterward you think that you couldn’t possibly have put things any
better than you did.

A first step in achieving that effect is to use only those words and
phrases and sentences that you might actually say to your reader if you
were face-to-face. If you wouldn’t say it, if it doesn’t sound like you,
why write it?

(Some people, we’ve noted elsewhere, write the way they talk, but their
talk has become impenetrable. They can safely ignore this section.) The
tone of your writing will vary as your readers vary. You would speak
more formally meeting the President of the United States for the first
time than to your uncle Max. For the same reason, a letter to the
President would naturally be more formal than a letter to a relative.
But it should still sound like you.

11. Strike out words you don’t need

The song goes, “Softly, as in a morning sunrise” — and Ring Lardner
explained that this was as opposed to a late afternoon or evening
sunrise.

Poetic license may be granted for a song, but not for expressions like
those on the next page.

Don’t write

Write

Advance plan

Plan

Take action

Act

Equally as

Equally

Hold a meeting

Meet

Study in depth

Study

New innovations

Innovations

Consensus of opinion

Consensus

At this point in time

Now

Until such time as

Until

In the majority of instances

In most cases, usually

On a local basis

Locally

Basically unaware of

Did not know

The overall plan

The plan

In the area of

Roughly

With regard to

About

In view of, on the basis of

Because

In the event of

If

For the purpose of, in order to To Despite the fact that

Although

Inasmuch as

Since

12. Use current standard English

Some years ago, a copywriter wrote this sentence in a draft of an
advertisement to persuade more people to read the New York Times.

He always acted like he knew what he was talking about.

Musing over the use of “like” in place of “as though” or “as if,”

someone at the Times said: “Yes, I guess that use of ‘like’ will become
standard in ten years or twenty, but I don’t think the New York Times
should pioneer in these matters.”

The pioneers have multiplied since this book first came out, but we’d
advise you on principle to be among the last to join them. New usage
offends many ears; established usage offends nobody. Had the copywriter

written, “He always acted as if he knew what he was talking about,” it
would have seemed both natural and literate.

The old rule is simple: Don’t use “like” in any case where “as if”

or “as though” would fit comfortably.

Nothing will call your literacy into question so promptly as using “I”
for

“me,” or “she” for “her.” Many people, though they have degrees from
reputable colleges, make this illiterate mistake: “He asked both Helen
and I to go to the convention.” Try the pronoun alone. You would never
write,

“He asked I to go to the convention.”

13. Don’t write like a lawyer or a bureaucrat

Lawyers say that they have to write to each other in language like this.

BLANK Corporation, a corporation organized under the laws of the State
of New South Wales, wishes to permit holders of its Ordinary Shares who
are resident in or nationals of the United States, its territories or
possessions (“U.S. Holders”) to participate in the Dividend Reinvestment
Plan (the “DRP”) on essentially the same terms as those available to its
other shareholders (“Non-U.S.

Holders”), and to provide the means by which holders of ADRs (as defined
below) who are resident in or nationals of the United States, its
territories or possessions (“U.S. Holders of ADRs”) may indirectly
participate, through the Depository, in the DRP. Toward this end, BLANK
has adopted amendments to the DRP (as amended, the

“Amended DRP”) (a copy of which is attached hereto) to permit such
participation.

Somewhat defensively, lawyers explain that such language is essential to
precision in contracts and such. Perhaps, but we suspect that the same
ideas could be expressed more briefly, more clearly, and without any
treacherous increase in ambiguity:

BLANK Corporation wants to offer holders of its Ordinary Shares who are
U.S. citizens or residents the opportunity to participate in its
Dividend Reinvestment Plan (DRP) on the same basis as non-U.S.

holders. This includes U.S. holders of ADRs (defined below) as well.

BLANK has amended the DRP to enable this participation, and a copy of
the amended DRP is attached.

Whatever excuses lawyers may have, there are none for the business
counterpart of this sort of writing, known as “bureaucratese.” Among its
symptoms are long sentences, abbreviations, clauses within clauses, and
jargon.

If you find yourself writing like that, try putting down what you want
to say the way you would say it to your readers if you were talking to
them face-to-face. Don’t worry if the result is too casual. Once you’ve
got the main idea down in plain English, you’ll find it easy to adjust
the tone of voice to the appropriate level of formality.

A good start in breaking out of bureaucratese is to banish from your
writing unnecessary Latin. For example, “re,” meaning “in the matter
of,” is never necessary outside the most formal legal documents. You
don’t need it in headings or titles any more than the Bible needs “re:
Genesis.”

14. Keep in mind what your reader doesn’t know

Your reader seldom knows ahead of time where you are going or what you
are trying to say. Never expect people to read your mind as well as your
letter or paper. Take into account how much you can assume your reader
knows — what background information, what facts, what technical terms.

Watch your abbreviations. Will they be an indecipherable code to some
readers? Might they be ambiguous even to those in the know?

K is code for a thousand in the United States, M means million in
England.

9/12 means September 12 here — December 9 over there.

If you must use abbreviations, define them the first time they appear in
your paper. “The cost per thousand (CPM) is a figure that we will keep
an eye on throughout this proposal.”

15. Punctuate carefully

Proper punctuation functions like road signs, helping your reader to
navigate your sentences. A left-out comma, or a comma in the wrong
place, can confuse readers — or even change your meaning altogether.
Here is a statement that most women will disagree with:

Woman without her man has no reason for living.

With a colon and a comma, the writer would get a different reaction:
Woman: without her, man has no reason for living.

A common mistake in business writing is to use quotation marks for
emphasis: This bolt provides “superior” tensile strength. When the head
of a large company put quotation marks around a word in an important
paper, his administrative assistant asked him why he did that. He
replied that it was to stress the truth of the point. The assistant
asked whether it would stress the truth if he were to register at a
hotel as John Durgin and “wife.”

Most dictionaries offer lucid help on common problems of punctuation,
such as the difference between a colon and a semicolon. You’ll find
brisk, useful advice either in the front or the back of the book.

16. Understate rather than overstate

Never exaggerate, unless you do so overtly to achieve an effect, and not
to deceive. It is more persuasive to understate than to overstate. A
single obvious exaggeration in an otherwise carefully written argument
can arouse suspicion of your entire case.

It can be hard to resist the tendency to stretch the facts to support a
strongly felt position. Or to serve up half-truths as camouflage for bad
news. Or to take refuge in euphemisms. Whenever tempted, remind yourself
that intelligent readers develop a nose for all such deceptive writing
and are seldom taken in by it.

For the same reason, you should always round out numbers conservatively.
Don’t call 6.7 “nearly seven” — call it “over six and a half.”

An obituary writer held in his file an envelope to be opened only when
H.

L. Mencken died. The message, from the famous writer himself: “Don’t
overdo it.”

17. Write so that you cannot be misunderstood

It is not enough to write sentences and paragraphs that your reader can
understand. Careful writers are ever alert to the many ways they might
be mis understood.

A student paper began:

My mother has been heavily involved with every member of the California
State Legislature.

Some readers might have misunderstood the nature of the energetic
mother’s civic involvement.

Ambiguity often results from a single sentence carrying too much cargo.

Breaking up your sentences can work wonders. Here is a statement from a
report by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission:

It would be prudent to consider expeditiously the provision of
instrumentation that would provide an unambiguous indication of the
level of fluid in the reactor vessel.

If you break that idea into two sentences, and follow other suggestions
in this chapter, you might end up with something like this: We should
make up our minds quickly about getting better gauges.

Good gauges would tell us exactly how much fluid is in the reactor

vessel.

18. Use plain English even on technical subjects Annuities rank among
the most complex financial products; one survey of investors found only
20 percent claimed a “good understanding” of them.

Annuity documents were so impenetrable that the SEC moved to require
prospectuses be written in “plain English” to make them more
understandable to consumers. Their strategy, reports The Wall Street
Journal: LOSE THE BIG WORDS.

A law clerk assigned to rewriting a variable annuity prospectus at
Prudential Investments was given this direction: Write it as if you were
sending it to someone you know — say, your grandparents.

The more technical the material, the less likely your reader will
understand it unless you put it into the language we all speak. An
exception is when both writer and reader practice the same technical
specialty. An advertising campaign for New York Telephone points up the
difference. In one of the advertisements, a company’s telecommunications
director talks technical language to other telecommunications
specialists: Given the strategic significance of our telecommunication
infrastructure, our fault tolerance to local loop failure left a lot to
be desired.

In the same ad, the company’s chief executive, talking to the rest of
us, uses different language to make the same point:

If the network goes down, the company goes belly up.

What Business Week calls “technobabble” has aggravated just about
everybody one way or another. “Plain English,” says the magazine, “is a
language unknown in most of the manuals that are supposed to help us use
electronic products.”

If you’re writing to lay readers on a technical subject, test an early
draft on a few of them. Finding out what’s clear and what isn’t can be
valuable to

[]

you in editing. It can make the difference between success and failure
in getting across what you want your reader to know, to understand, or
to do.

Most murky writing is inadvertent, a sincere if doomed effort to
communicate. Far worse is the deliberate attempt to say something that
you know readers won’t like in a way that you hope they won’t
understand.

Let’s call this the techno-euphemism.

A nurse who dropped a baby referred in her report to “the non-facile
manipulation of a newborn.”

The uncomfortable writer of an Air Force news release, reporting on a
test of a new missile, said that “approximately 70

seconds into the launch an anomaly occurred causing the range safety
office to initiate the command destruct sequence.” Hiding in there is
the news that something went wrong with the missile and they had to blow
it up.

Bad news is not made better by being baffling as well as unwelcome.

When you spit it out in plain English, readers still may not like it.
But their displeasure won’t be compounded by the suspicion that you’re
trying to slip one past them.

Consider the surprising bestselling business book Who Moved My Cheese? —
an allegory about change by Spencer Johnson. It’s a simple, almost
corny, story about two small mice and two small humans who live in a
maze where they find cheese, and how they respond when one day their
cheese isn’t where it used to be. Its appeal, says Fortune, is both its
message — prepare for change, accept it, enjoy it — and its telling, in
simple language.

Fortune cites a book on strategy by four management consultants: In the
specialist model, a company competes across geography by leveraging
specialization advantages and intangible scale effects (i.e., leveraging
the fixed costs of building intangible assets).

It compares that sentence with this one from Who Moved My Cheese?

— making almost the same point.

Every day the mice and the littlepeople spent time in the maze looking
for their own special cheese.

We’re obviously not doing justice either to the consultants’ text or the
Cheese book, but the latter has really struck a chord in business
circles.

CEOs of important companies are buying and distributing thousands of
copies. Why? It makes an important point — and does so in words that
communicate. The author, says Harvard Business School professor John
Kotter, “has written something that might actually influence people.”

You might call that writing that works.

OceanofPDF.com

HOW’S YOUR STATUS ON AMBULATION?

And Other Things People Actually Say

A doctor asked a patient on the phone, “How’s your status on
ambulation?” What he wanted to know was, “Can you walk well enough to
come to the office?”

Here are more examples, heard with our own ears, of people talking the
way pretentious writers write. (This is not what we mean when we say,
“Write the way you talk.”)

Weather forecasters who say tornadic activity instead of tornadoes, snow
events instead of snowstorms. On international flights, pilots ask
passengers to extinguish all smoking materials instead of to put out
their cigarettes. A pilot who said, “We’re only five minutes late;
considering the weather, I think that’s exemplatory [ sic]” instead of
pretty good.

Here’s a sampling of what we hear in business — over and over.

Resource constrained instead of not enough people to do the job. Bake in
the numbers instead of include. In the August timeframe instead of
August. Tasked by the organization instead of assigned. The optics of
the plan instead of how the plan will look. Double-click the point
instead of emphasize. Drill down instead of analyze. Scope this out
instead of check further. On a go-forward basis instead of in the
future. Operationalized its goal, instead of achieved. Aggressively ramp
headcount instead of hiring a lot of people.

Or bandwidth — as in I don’t have the bandwidth (time) for that meeting
or He doesn’t have the bandwidth (ability) for the job.

Or this mouthful (we don’t make these up): The near-term cost of staying
in the business plus the opportunity cost of suboptimal

resource allocation, instead of The cost of staying in the business plus
the cost of tying up money we might better spend elsewhere.

This style of talk is generally heard among middle managers. It seldom
comes from the CEO, who, having risen to the top, is less interested in
impressing people than in clear communications — and getting things
done.

Some terms that jarred originally have come through relentless usage to
be accepted as more precise than their substitutes. Delta from forecast,
instead of change from what we predicted; What are the metrics? instead
of How will we measure this? This is a gray area. Just ask yourself
whether you’re being clear — or trying to impress.

OceanofPDF.com

3 “I Love My Computer”

The process of writing and editing on a computer, especially for anyone
who started life on a typewriter, is so pleasurable that it elicits the
kind of affection many people feel for a new car or some other precious
possession.

It’s so fast and effortless to change a word, add a point, delete a
sentence, move a paragraph. The practices we advocate in this book turn
out to be easy, even fun.

Even those few still attached to their typewriters may soon find their
clickety-clack days coming to an end. Author Tom Wolfe told an
interviewer that his novel A Man in Full would be his last typewritten
work, but not because he had fallen in love with a computer. He couldn’t
get his typewriter fixed any more.

In his excellent book On Writing Well, William Zinsser calls the PC

“God’s gift, or technology’s gift, to good writing.” But marvelous as
these devices are, it’s worth keeping in mind that they are machines and
not magicians. They will not miraculously change a bad writer into a
good one.

They can even entrench a couple of the worst practices of bad writers,
by making it so easy to send out half-baked material.

Most computers have dazzling charms for the writer. There’s a good
thesaurus, under Tools. There are templates for memos, business letters
—

anything you write repeatedly — that preset font, paper size, margins,
as established by you. This saves a lot of time. Other tools allow you
to do all sorts of useful things with page numbers, footnotes, inserts,
section headings. You can get a word count in two seconds.

In the rest of this chapter we will run through the ways you can enlist
your computer in your efforts to write well. And we’ll put up a few
warning signs to help you avoid the hazards that computers can throw in
front of you.

How to Use Your Computer in Writing There are as many ways to write on a
computer as there are personal habits of writing. One writer likes to go
back and correct after every paragraph or two, another roars through an
entire draft without pause. No two people will find exactly the same set
of practices suitable for their individual turns of mind. Your own
proclivities will steer you toward what’s best for you.

Longtime users, however, are in broad agreement on the merits of a
number of procedures. Among them:

1. Write first, format later

Formatting is not writing. Playing with the details of the appearance of
your paper can distract you from grappling with its content.

On the other hand, if you don’t want your draft to be a shapeless
jumble, it’s a good idea to work from an outline — and to do just enough
formatting at the outset to make your structure visible.

The drafter of this chapter, for instance, formatted the headings and
subheadings — all from his outline — as he typed the first rough
version.

This kept his thoughts in order as he went along. But going counter to
his own advice, he also fiddled with indents and put the numbers and
subheadings into boldface. They looked nice on the screen but wasted
time and interrupted his train of thought.

2. Practice the Rule of More Than One

With computers, you have to be paranoid about saving your file. Never
have just one copy of whatever you’re working on; make sure there is a
second copy — somewhere. Hard drives can crash, floppy disks are not
forever. The authors save everything that is important on disks and
print hard copies as well.

Get to know the AutoSave feature (found in Tools/Options), and set it to
save your document at least every 15 minutes. Power surges, input
errors, and other obliterators of your work are far from theoretical
hazards.

We’re also getting religion about running weekly virus checks. We let it
go for a few months recently, and discovered forty-five viruses on our
computer — and more than a hundred on our assistant’s. Companies that
used to catch a major virus every quarter now find one almost every day.

How often you make a hard copy of your rough draft depends on the length
and importance of what you’re writing — and on your own working methods.
The more important the paper, the more likely you’ll want to compare
drafts or refer back to earlier ones. While some programs make that
possible directly on your computer screen, comparisons are often easier
to read and to consider on side-by-side hard copies.

Date your drafts (using the Insert key). The authors would have been
totally confused on chapters of this book without dates on every draft.

Never ever circulate anything more than two pages long without numbered
pages. It’s maddeningly difficult to find a particular place in your
document, or refer someone to it, unless the pages are numbered.

3. Give thought to your file names

Newer versions of word processing programs have made it possible to use
descriptive titles (not limited to eight characters) for documents in
your files. They also made it easy to be clever and get carried away.

As your disk fills up, it gets harder and harder to remember the cute
title you gave that letter. And a complicated hunt through everything on
your disk will have you longing for the good old days of physically
riffling through a file drawer. You should develop a logical and
easy-to-remember system for your file names. Professional writers think
of their electronic file as a giant drawer with a small number of major
folders, each divided into various subfolders, and so on.

For the current edition of this book, WTW3 was the primary folder;
e-chapter and c-chapter two of the subfolders for new material on e-mail
and computers respectively. In choosing your file names, prefer logic
and

simplicity to ingenuity. Your file should be a handy tool, not a puzzle
or an amusement.

Cautions

“The word processor is an angel but it can’t grant absolution,” says
freelance writer David Swift. Because edited work looks so perfect on
the screen, it’s easy to be deluded into thinking that it really is.

Proofread — and proofread again. Never send any document without
checking everything with your own eyes. It’s a good idea to do your
proofreading on a hard copy rather than on your computer screen. We’re
not sure why, but when you face a piece of paper like the one your
reader is going to see, you become more alert to errors.

Use the spell check program — with care. While it does a good job in
highlighting words it thinks are misspelled, sometimes it tries to be
too smart and automatically corrects words without asking. That can be
dangerous, as one of us found in writing that Savill Gardens outside
London had been introduced to him by his friend Stanley Pigott. It was
“corrected”

to servile gardens introduced by Stanley piglet. Computers are only
human, one expert noted.

A cartoon showed this on a PC screen.

I have a spelling checker,

It came with my PC;

It plainly marks four my revue

Mistakes I cannot sea.

I’ve run this poem threw it,

I’m sure you pleased too no,

Its letter perfect in it’s weigh,

My checker tolled me sew.

The grammar checker is even more fallible.

Stick to the point. In the cartoon strip Shoe, a character sitting in
front of his PC replies to an onlooker who has asked what he’s writing:
“Nothing so far. But the computer makes writing a lot easier, I’ll say
that. With just a

flick of the finger I can write reams of nothing. I call it streams of
unconsciousness.”

Resisting streams of unconsciousness may call for a conscious effort.

Good writers heed their outlines and stick to the point.

Since even a loose first draft can look crisp and finished on your
screen, you can fool yourself into mistaking it for a taut masterpiece.
The illusion may be magnified by the satisfying whirrings and clickings
of your printer as it seemingly certifies that what you’ve written is
all set for publication.

Careful writers try not to be fooled by appearances.

Be conservative in your choice of type fonts. The most readable fonts
(type faces) are the ones used most often by well-edited magazines and
newspapers. Choose fonts that resemble what you see in Time or Sports
Illustrated, for example. For anything longer than a paragraph or two,
ordinary roman faces are more readable than italics, and serif faces
(like this text) are more readable than sans serif — like this. This
isn’t a matter of taste or opinion. It has been proved over and over in
careful studies of readership around the world.

Whatever font you choose, stick with it throughout your document. You
will not hurt the feelings of your computer if you don’t use all its
fonts in every paper. And you will save your readers’ eyes.

Keep your fingers off the boldface and underline keys. Boldface and
underlining are fine for headings but should be used only for occasional
emphasis in text. The same goes for italics.

When you emphasize too many words, the effect is not what you intend.

It may even be the opposite — when everything is emphasized, nothing is
emphasized. And your page looks messy.

When you do want to emphasize a word or phrase, italics will do it most
professionally. Well-edited magazines, newspapers, and books always
prefer italics to boldface or underlines.

Forget about justifying type on the right margin. Justified type on the
right looks good in books and magazines because the spacing between
words is handled with a lot of care. Software programs tend to do the
job crudely, leaving artificially large spaces between words or else
jamming the words too close together.

Readers are accustomed to business papers with ragged right-hand
margins. They look more natural, and are easier to read than papers that

have forced both margins to line up. The narrower the measure, the worse
the results.

Enough is enough. “Perfectionism is spelled p-a-r-a-l-y-s-i-s,” said
Churchill. In some hands the computer illustrates his point. Some people
never stop editing. They never stop formatting. There is always one more
change to try. So our final word of caution is don’t be too cautious —
let ‘er rip! The computer is your liberator. Don’t become its slave.

OceanofPDF.com

HOW MUCH COMPUTER DO YOU NEED FOR WRITING?

Whether it’s your first computer or an upgrade, you need note daunted by
the hardware numbers or software options. Writers don’t require a lot of
electronic horsepower. Any computer sold today by a reputable
manufacturer is more than powerful enough for word processing and
e-mail. Major brands all give you more processing, disk space, and
memory than writers know what to do with. (But get a quiet computer with
a quiet fan.)

Which laptop you choose has implications for writing. Small, lightweight
models, with slightly reduced keyboards and smaller displays, are a
reasonable compromise if you go through a lot of airports. The slightly
heavier, full-feature portables are better if you write or read large
amounts of text, or use your laptop as a desktop or primary computer.

A few bucks extra on the monitor is a wise investment. The life span of
a monitor is generally twice that of a desktop computer, and a desktop
has twice the life span of a laptop. So it pays to get a monitor that’s
easy on your eyes. That means no smaller than seventeen inches,
preferably nineteen inches if you have enough room on your desk or
table. (New generation LCD monitors, which are clearer and flicker less
than current CRT models, permit you to use a screen that’s a couple of
inches smaller.)

Microsoft Word, the leading word processing system, is excellent and
getting better all the time. Some experienced users have stopped
automatically ordering each upgrade that comes along with new bells and
whistles. They find earlier versions familiar, simpler, and adequate for
their needs.

Printers have come a long way from the slow and noisy dot-matrix
printers of not long ago. Ink-jet print quality is good. Laser printers
are faster, with better print quality — and more expensive.

The big news is faster access to e-mail and the Internet, thanks to
improved dial-up telephone modems. ISDN (Integrated Services Digital
Network) or DSL (Digital Subscriber Lines) offer Internet connections up
to twenty times faster than phone line connections, but at a price.
Cable lines, connected through an Ethernet cable (built into most new
PCs), are even faster.

Technology is moving so fast that more specific guidance would be
outdated by the time this book appears. And it’s not what you have —

it’s what you do with it that counts.

OceanofPDF.com

4 E-Mail — the Great Mailbox in the Sky

There was Santa on the stage of New York’s Radio City Music Hall,
reading Christmas letters and without making anything special of it,
telling thousands of kids and grownups they can also reach him at
Santa.com. And nobody blinked. (It was equally in character for him to
stay in touch with the home office via mobile fax and cell phone.) We’ve
moved from baby boomers to Generation X to generation.com.

Whether you count e-messages in billions or trillions, they’re replacing
a lot of conventional mail. E-mail does things that letters or phone
calls cannot do as well or cannot do at all. It is easy, fast, simple —
and cheap.

It’s perfect for quick answers, confirming plans, and short messages. It
saves money on phone calls, messengers, and airfreight bills.

With e-mail, time zones go away. As does phone tag. If you do manage to
connect on the phone, you are likely to interrupt whatever the other
person is doing, even if it’s just thinking. With e-mail, you send at
your convenience, the receiver picks up at his or hers.

E-mail helps organizations stay connected and react quickly.

All interoffice communications should flow over e-mail, preaches Bill
Gates, “so workers can act on news with reflex-like speed.” He goes on
to direct that meetings should not be used to present information: “It’s
more effective to use e-mail.”

E-mail is changing rules of where we live and work. Instead of moving
their families abroad, executives take up temporary residence in hotel
rooms and become “virtual” expatriates with the aid of e-mail and cell
phones. A generation.com — type cites the benefit of a permanent
address:

“Physical residence for people of my generation changes constantly, but
my

e-mail address will stay with me forever so people will always be able
to communicate with me.”

Warning: E-mail can be addictive and create problems of its own. Its
emphasis on speed conflicts with matters that deserve thought and
reflection. There are times when nothing beats conversation to solve a
problem, or when courtesy calls for a nicely typed or handwritten
letter.

Newcomers on-line, giddy with their discovery, want to broadcast to
everyone. Garrulous bores find a large unwilling audience. People with a
natural tendency to hide barricade themselves behind walls of e-mail,
sending notes to people four desks away. More people send more
superfluous thoughts to more people, creating a growing glut in the
system.

Busy executives tune out, delete, or simply don’t respond.

OceanofPDF.com

Time is the problem

The problem isn’t so much writing e-mail as receiving it. But that in
turn presents a writing problem: how to get your e-mail read by busy
people, and acted on.

A seatmate on the plane from New York to Dallas, a consultant, reported
nine hundred unopened e-mails on his computer in the past ten months. It
wasn’t laziness — he read and responded to e-mail for the better part of
the flight. There was just so much of it that he had to be selective and
ignore or delete all the obvious junk or apparent trivia that surrounded
the important stuff.

Most executives receive fifty to one hundred or more e-messages a day;
many receive up to four hundred. Assume half are easy to filter out and
dismiss. Responding just to the important half, and initiating a couple
of dozen messages, can take two to four hours a day. Every day. The flow
never stops.

Planning time off for travel or vacation? Lots of luck! If you don’t
pick up your messages, they pile up relentlessly, making your return to
the office that much harder. The merciless flow forces deluged
recipients to steal family time or sacrifice sleep, even pull out
computers during meetings in moments when their attention isn’t
required.

The time problem goes beyond e-mail. A Pitney Bowes survey shows the
average U.S. office worker sends or receives 201 messages a day from
telephones, e-mail, voice mail, postal mail, interoffice mail, fax,
Post-its, telephone message slips, pagers, cell phones, messenger
services, and express mail. Many of these put executives “on” all the
time. What used to be getaway time no longer exists. Says labor
economist Alan B. Krueger:

“It’s gotten far more difficult to measure where work ends and leisure
begins.”

Some comprehension of how, in all these ways, e-mail adds to the
pressures of business today, is the starting point in writing it well.

How to Write Effective E-Mail

Business e-mail comes in several flavors. A large part consists of fast,
terse notes — generally the shorter the better, as we will cover. In
many cases, e-mail is replacing the paper memo or letter, but that
doesn’t change the factors that go into a good memo or letter.

Then there’s a powerful new use of e-mail — collaborative work, a
product of the Internet/PC era. This use reduces the need for
collaborators to be in the same room (or building or city) to work
together. It is characterized by a brief message with a document
attached for comment, calling for the principles of both good e-notes
and good business writing.

The authors of this book collaborated on this new edition using e-mail
between New York and Chicago, trading chapters and thoughts.

All these forms of business e-mail have a common goal: to move things
along and not waste time. And all present the writer with the same
problem: how to make sure your message gets read.

1. Make the subject heading clear — and compelling All e-mail looks
exactly the same in your In Box. There are no visual clues to what’s
important and what isn’t — no airmail stamps, no fine-looking
stationery, no impressively bulky envelopes, no familiar handwriting.
The only clues are the identity of the sender and the nature of the
subject.

You can’t do much about the first — a recipient is either interested in
hearing from you or is not. It helps, for instance, if you’re the boss.

The element that is under your control is how you identify your subject
in the heading, or title. The authors come from the advertising
business, and may be prejudiced on this point. But we know that the
headline is the best read part of any ad, the element that gets people
to read on. It’s worth studying newspapers, particularly The Wall Street
Journal, to understand what kinds of headlines convert scanners to
readers.

You need a subject line that compels attention and gives a sense of what
follows. It can be formal or informal, serious or colorful, bland or
newsy. It

cannot be absent.

Think of the consultant on the plane. Which e-mail will he read first —

Status of proposal or Winning client approval? We know he won’t open up
e-mail without any title at all unless he knows the sender or has read
everything else.

Busy executives filter their e-mail. Some use automatic filters that
sort incoming messages into a priority system or just scan the index of
senders and subjects. Terri Dial, who runs Wells Fargo in California,
deletes a third of her messages without ever opening them (and, as a
consequence, now pays more attention to her own subject lines so mail
she sends gets read).

She cautions against trying to get past this filtering by marking
messages urgent.

Too many senders use the urgent flag and now it’s a bit like the little
boy who cried wolf, only there are lots of little boys. Even if you use
URGENT selectively, others don’t. And remember that if you cry wolf too
often, others will note it and your e-mail will get even shorter shrift.

It is especially important that e-mail messages sent to a group quickly
communicate the content so each recipient can determine if it is
relevant to him or her. It is annoying to find after three paragraphs
that the content is of no interest to you. Try to make clear at once
which readers your message is for, e.g., Schedule for rocket-launch
team.

Don’t automatically keep old titles on replies that have nothing to do
with the original subject, or on correspondence that goes back and forth
endlessly with the same title, so it becomes impossible to distinguish
one note from another. On the other hand, if you’re adding to a message
string that is already in progress and well established, don’t change
the title —

even if it’s no longer appropriate.

If you’re sending several messages on unrelated topics, it’s often
better to send separate e-mails. It’s no more work, and each message
will be a lot easier to find and refer to.

While you cannot inflate your importance to the recipient, you can at
least make clear who you are. E-mail addresses that are all numbers or
signal your interests should show your name in the display in some way.

(Among our fishing friends, we quickly identify troutsmith@emailserver,

but can never remember who goes by dryflier@emailserver.) People learn
quickly to delete junk mail. If a name doesn’t ring a bell, out goes the
message.

It’s often useful to conclude with a signature that lists your phone,
fax, and address. Title, too, if that helps. Many suggestions for this
chapter came in e-mail signed:

Regards,

Scott Cutler

VP Advanced Technology & Chief Technology Officer Compaq Computer
Corporation, PC Products Group

[telephone]

Most e-mail packages allow users to set up and automatically append
signatures like this to outgoing messages.

2. Cut to the point

We mean that literally. Cut. Cut ruthlessly.

Not just to save the reader’s time, but to get to the essence. E-mail is
a different medium. Reading long memos on a PC screen is a pain;
anything over one screen risks not being read (and is better sent as an
attachment).

“I have never seen an e-mail message too short — most effective e-mails
are short and very much to the point,” says Manny Fernandez, Chairman of
the Gartner Group.

Try to take out 50 percent of what you’ve written. You’ll be amazed how
your points leap out.

Someone asked Rodin how he could sculpt an elephant out of marble. It’s
easy, he responded, “You just chip away everything that isn’t an
elephant.” Chip away everything that isn’t your point.

“Keep it short and sweet” is the first e-mail principle at HBO. Their
executives are told that people want fast answers to simple questions.
Make it brief, but make it complete — “meaty, concise, and to the
point,” as one of our best English teachers demanded.

As for abbreviations, although there is a whole library of clever ones
for e-mail, we don’t recommend them. Beyond FYI, most are new slang not
familiar to enough people.

3. Avoid e-mail tag

Some e-mail can be too short, in the sense that it doesn’t provide
context. Responding without attaching or referring to the original
message makes the reader search through Sent messages (if saved) to make
sense of the reply.

“I’m available,” for example, should be “I’m available to speak at your
meeting on the fourteenth.”

“Did you get my message regarding the meeting on the fourteenth? Can you
come?” as opposed to “Did you get my message?”

It’s forgetting to set context that causes so much e-mail tag. If the
writer sends a message and the reader has to ask for clarification, the
e-mail points of contact have been doubled. Be clear about the purpose
of your message.

What do you want the reader to do?

If you expect a response, you may want to set a deadline so that the
response is not at the reader’s inclination, which may be never.

4. Set the right tone of voice

E-mail is faceless and voiceless. The mood of the sender cannot be
communicated by the inflection of a voice as on the telephone.
E-messages are a different animal, subject to misinterpretation. Brief
comments can come across as abrupt, terse questions as angry (“Where’s
the memo on

…?”).

Some people use punctuation mark combinations, known as “smileys” or

“emoticons,” to convey the right tone. These take time to insert, are
more

used by teens than business, and not always understood.

The subject heading can be a good place to establish the tone you want.

Help! How do we reply?

Or,

Thanks a bunch, everybody!

Another place to suggest tone is the salutation. Some traditionalists
can’t bring themselves to abandon the time-honored Dear Jean. Others
don’t bother with salutations at all. But a greeting of some sort,
especially if you’re originating the correspondence, can help start
things on the right foot. For example, Hello Mr. Brown is informal and
friendly yet professional, and somehow seems more appropriate in these
electronic times than Dear Mr. Brown. With colleagues and everyday
associates, a simple Hello, George, or Hi can suffice. Or just use the
first name.

A lot of e-mail ends abruptly — no signature of any kind. It just stops.

Since the sender is identified at the beginning, goes the reasoning, why
repeat his or her name at the end? But unless the tone of your message
is absolutely clear, closing with Thanks or Best wishes or Cheers
removes any doubt as to your state of mind.

In the past, people took the time to think, to consider what they wanted
to say, before responding to a letter or memo. The possibility for
instant response to e-mail — indeed the expectation of it in many cases
—

increases the danger of going off half-cocked.

Compose yourself, then compose your message. If you’re writing an angry
or irritable note, think twice before clicking Send. Seasoned e-mailers
admit to sending hot messages and regretting they hadn’t slept on them.

Old-style memos and letters, which had to be typed, then read and
signed, then put in the Out box, and then mailed, gave senders time to
cool off and reconsider. Not so with e-mail — one click and it’s as good
as on your recipient’s screen.

Some people protect themselves by handling correspondence off-line,
downloading all messages, both incoming and outgoing, before answering,
so they can read and correct before sending. They find they tend to be
hasty when the modem is on and the Send button is at the ready.
Sometimes it’s wise to respond, “Let me think about it overnight. I’ll
get back to you in the

morning.” In this way, the sender knows the e-mail has been received —

and that the response, when it arrives, will be a thoughtful one.

E-Mail Etiquette

It seems like an oxymoron to couple this Victorian term with a New Age
electronic medium. Nonetheless, there are old-fashioned virtues like
courtesy and neatness that remain relevant in this modern medium.

In e-mail, one translation of courtesy is Limit the number of copies.
The only thing easier than sending an e-message is adding people to the
list receiving it. Copies are sent to far too many people — for the
wrong reasons. To impress them. To cover yourself. To “interest” them.
Don’t broadcast supposedly “interesting” material to people unless you
know their interests. It’s the e-mail equivalent of junk mail.

If you want action, list only one name in the TO: field. With more than
one name, it is not clear who has the responsibility to act and becomes
likely that no one will take it on.

Reply All may be the most dangerous button on the screen. Count to ten
before you unleash this plague on your victims.

Double-check to make sure your message goes only to the people you want
it to go to. An evaluation of a partner in an accounting firm was
inadvertently circulated among several thousand people. While the
evaluation wasn’t negative, its broadcast sure was embarrassing.

The following e-mail really happened:

From: Charlie Mix-up

Sent: Wednesday, May 26, 10:16 A.M.

To: L.A. Press List

Subject: FW: Press Summary, 5/26, and apologies for the 2,000 emails

Dear all,

For those of you who yesterday received 2,000 e-mails from me, I want to
sincerely apologize. I had a problem in the

configuration of my outlook and it forwarded by rule all the messages to
the L.A. press summary list. I did not mean to cause you any trouble. It
won’t happen again.

Note: Do not reply to this message because it will go to all the members
of the list.

Thanks and regards,

Charlie

Headed “E-Mail Fever,” the following message to his staff from John
Riccitiello, CEO of Electronic Arts in Silicon Valley, provides a
heartfelt summary of ways to keep e-mail under control:

From: Riccitiello, John

Sent: Friday, January 21, 2000 2:31 P.M.

To: eaworld@eahq

Subject: E-mail fever

In the past few weeks, many EA folks have expressed their frustration
over the huge quantity of e-mail we at EA seem to send each other. Many
of us feel overwhelmed.

I would like to suggest a couple “rules” that might help stem the tide.

1.

Do not copy unneeded persons on your e-mail. Send notes only to those
that need to read it.

2.

Avoid using the “Reply to All” button … unless there is really a good
reason.

3.

Do not join in the e-mail circus by adding your thoughts or short ideas
to these never-ending e-mail threads that clog up our in boxes. Instead,
when you see a monster e-mail thread starting, stop the flow and call a
real face-to-face meeting to resolve the issue.

4.

Do not use e-mail when a quick word over a cube wall will do the trick.

5.

Avoid using broadcast e-mails unless absolutely required (yes, I see the
irony in this).

6.

Try to follow this rule … unless what you are sending (a) imparts new
information to someone who needs it, or (b) agrees to a request, or (c)
responds to a question or (d) asks a question or makes a request, do not
send anything.

I know many of us get the shakes if we do not send an e-mail every few
minutes, but take a deep breath and try to get over it. We’ll all be
happier.

John

Riccitiello says he has to send this reminder every six months or so.

Try not to make people scroll through a page or more of addressees
before getting to the subject; they tend not to bother. One way to
handle a long list is to give the group an alias name in the Address
Book — we used e-pals for this book.

If you find yourself caught up in a series of copied messages which are
of only peripheral interest to you, politely ask the author to take you
off the copy list. When someone sends a batch of questions that will
require too much time to answer in writing, ask the sender to set a
telephone date for you to tackle them.

Since many executives are locked up in meetings or traveling and may not
check their e-mail every day, sometimes it’s wise to alert the recipient
if the message is urgent. A brief voice mail message works here; actual
contact is not needed. The general rule remains: e-mail or phone, but
not both.

Another principle of etiquette, neatness, translates as making it easy
to read — and is covered in the chapter with that title. However, one
aspect of making it easy to read applies particularly to e-mail: how to
handle attachments.

If the purpose of your message is to deliver an attachment, say so
immediately: “Here is an attachment …” And go easy with the attachment.

It’s irritating to receive presentations with wild colors for text and
background; they’re hard or impossible to read, and take forever to
download.

When sending large attachments or multiple files, your reader will
appreciate it if you compress the files. (Check your PC manual or Help
program to figure out how.) Compression conveniently groups files
together and shortens download time.

This is especially relevant outside the United States. Remember that
many people around the world pay per-character charges and telephone
surcharges to receive your e-mail. And don’t assume that the recipient
has a high-speed modem, and easy access to the World Wide Web. If your
e-mail contains an attached file or refers to a www address, your reader
may not be able to get important information.

If you ever receive attachments with e-mail, you should definitely
install a virus checker. One virus, Melissa, only caused embarrassment —
it sent a list of porn sites from a target consumer’s e-mail address
book. Other viruses destroy files, wipe out data on a PC’s hard drive,
and even make it impossible to start up programs. The Chernobyl virus
caused computer meltdowns around the world. Handle attachments with care
— and back up anything important.

OceanofPDF.com

When NOT to e-mail

Most circumstances in which snail mail is preferable to e-mail are
obvious: legal matters requiring signatures, invitations to formal
events, fund-raising letters. Here are a couple that may be less
obvious.

If you have to change or cancel a meeting on short notice, a phone call
or fax works better than e-mail. Don’t count on people checking their In
box two hours before the event.

E-mail is not usually the best way to introduce yourself to someone. The
executive contacted is probably flooded with messages and is not likely
to open or read yours. It’s easier to ignore or hit Delete than to say
no thanks in person.

OceanofPDF.com

Nothing is private

When you seal a letter, place a stamp on it, and mail it, it does not
become the property of the U.S. Postal Service. Your office e-mail,
however, is the property of the company that pays for the e-mail system.

Companies have the right to search their company mailboxes, and many do.

Everybody uses office systems for personal messages. Just remember, it
isn’t private.

Some people describe e-mail as a high-tech watercooler, a place for
off-color jokes, gossip, gripes about management. But at the
watercooler, you have a pretty good idea of who’s within listening
range. Monica Lewinsky’s e-comments, used in Clinton’s impeachment
trial, led Fortune to comment,

“It’s best not to E-mail anything you don’t want to read on the front
page of The New York Times.”

Short of that, a good general principle is, never put anything
personally negative in e-mail.

Given the litigating world in which we live, it isn’t smart to send
potentially distasteful material to colleagues on a corporate network.
People have lost their jobs for sending jokes that they believed to be
harmless but which offended someone who then complained.

E-mail records of exchanges that may have seemed innocent at the time
have been credited as the U.S. Justice Department’s “favorite weapon” in
its antitrust case against Microsoft. They are often a plaintiff
lawyer’s dream come true. If you’re on a corporate network, backup
copies of your e-messages are archived. Lawyers go after system backup
tapes to recover and subpoena supposedly deleted documents, and a system
administrator can access anything that remains on your computer’s hard
drive.

The rule with paper files used to be, “If in doubt, toss it out.” Not so
easy with electronic files, where Delete doesn’t delete. All it does is
move material to another folder, like Recycle. You can delete again, but
all that does is remove pointers to the message. The message itself
still exists and can be found, unless you go another step and shred it
by scrambling the

[]

codes. In any case, a record remains on another computer somewhere. Your
odds of keeping something private are better if there is no written
file.

The Internet is changing language. It has propelled the previously
deliberate pace of language evolution to higher speeds. That was the
general agreement at a meeting of the Modern Language Association. “A
hotbed for change,” said one linguistics professor.

This is a new medium and an opportunity to be creative — and an
invitation to abuse. The Reagan-Bush White House created two hundred
thousand electronic files; the Clinton office is creating six million
files a year. E-mail is becoming more ubiquitous with wireless
transmission and access from mobile phones and handheld computers.
Beyond millions of new users coming on-line, e-mail voice recognition
has arrived — with the terrifying prospect of people dictating
stream-of-consciousness e-mails.

With such developments, the fight to stand out in the clutter can only
intensify. It’s unlikely that anyone will award you points for good
e-writing.

But if you get a reputation for being long-winded, fuzzy, or wasting
people’s time, your messages will tend to be glossed over, ignored, or
deleted without being read.

OceanofPDF.com

VOICE MAIL AND E-MAIL

Business increasingly moves in an interconnected world of e-mail, cell
phones, and voice mail. Voice mail can work together effectively with
e-mail — to say an important e-mail is coming (“Watch for it”), to
summarize its major points, to catch people who don’t keep up with their
e-mail every day.

You can’t attach a document to voice mail or provide the same detail as
in e-mail. E-mail is frequently the only written record of agreements.
Many executives listen to voice mail in a car or on a cell phone, and
can’t take notes.

Voice mail is often abused, with messages that are too long and
repetitive yet not complete. Names and phone numbers are either not
given or not clear. The obligation to keep it short and sweet is even
greater than with e-mail. You have a captive audience, unable to skip
ahead, waiting impatiently for “the point.”

Before you pick up the phone, assume it’s likely the person you’re
calling will be out of the office or in a meeting, and you’ll be into
voice mail. Prepare yourself by thinking about what you want to say.

Make it concise and to the point. No pleasantries necessary.

Jot down a few bullet points that will make your message short and
clear. (If it must be long, announce this — and the reason — at the
start.)

State your name and number clearly and slowly, especially the number.
(This is the most violated principle, and its violation the most
irritating, especially from people who want something done.)

Then hang up.

OceanofPDF.com

5 Memos and Letters That Get Things Done

“We don’t write memos to each other!” is a declaration one often hears
these days, as e-mail, phone calls, and meetings handle more and more
business communication. On the other hand, we have yet to see an office
without a printer or an executive without pencil and pad of paper.

The written word remains the best way to communicate in a variety of
circumstances. Unlike a phone call, one can refer to a memo or a letter
over and over. Unlike voice mail, you can scan a memo for the points
important to you. You can study it, ponder it, pass it on to other
people, or pull it up and print it out to refresh your memory days or
years later. Unlike presentation decks, with their telegraphic and
abbreviated points, memos and letters spell things out without relying
on a spoken explanation.

As the writer, you can express your thoughts precisely, with every
nuance just so. As the reader, you can consider a written matter when
and where you choose and for as long a time as you wish. Good memos and
letters can solve problems, clarify issues, straighten out
misunderstandings, raise questions or answer them, spread the word,
complain, mollify, cheer up, and praise.

Here are some ways to assure that your memos and letters succeed in
their missions.

How to Write a Memo

Memos are letters to people within your organization, or to people
outside it with whom you work closely. You are writing to colleagues;
write in a conversational style. But an informal tone of voice is no
excuse for

sloppy thinking or careless expression. A confusing or ambiguous memo
slows things down or messes them up.

Whether sent by e-mail or on paper, good memos follow similar formats.

1. Put a title on every memo

In e-mail memos your title is in your heading. On paper, it’s best to
center your title in capital letters over your message. It’s easier for
someone to spot there, thumbing through files or briefcase, than tucked
off to the left as “Re: Something or Other,” along with the list of
addressees.

Your title should never be tricky or obscure. It should identify —
swiftly, and for all readers — what your memo is about. A memo proposing
an overdue raise for Tony Andrino should not be titled LONG OVERDUE.
Better would be RAISE FOR TONY ANDRINO.

If you are responding to somebody else’s memo, say so in your title:
FRANK OWEN’S MEMO ON HOG PRICES

GENDER-BLIND ADMISSIONS:

YOUR MAY 3 IDEAS

In memos on paper, don’t worry about the length of your title. Say
enough to identify your subject clearly:

RATIONALE FOR

GLOBAL CORPORATE ADVERTISING CAMPAIGN

Clear, simple titles attract the attention of interested parties, and
focus their thoughts on your subject from the instant they start to
read.

2. Address memos only to the person who must take action

Send copies to the people you merely want to keep informed.

From: Bill Durwin

To: Margaret Baker

copies: Cindy Lee

Sam Nasikawa

Bob Nieman

This says that Bill wants Margaret to do something, and the others just
to know what’s going on. If several people must do something, address
the memo to all of them and make clear what each must do.

We prefer the full word “copies” to “cc,” an anachronistic abbreviation
for “carbon copies.” And as an aside, we deplore the use of “blind”
copies

— copies sent behind the back of the addressee. As one executive puts
it,

“You can tell how political a person is by the number of blind copies he
sends out.”

List names of those receiving copies alphabetically. If you list them in
order of importance, you often run into complications. Is the head of
manufacturing more important than the head of research? Who comes first
among four assistant deans?

Such problems evaporate if you put all names in alphabetical order,
except when that would be ludicrous. It would be ludicrous, for example,
in a memo to the Human Resources director with copies to two assistants
and the president, to list the president alphabetically among the
assistants. Put the president’s name first; list the others
alphabetically.

3. Make your structure obvious

Before you start to write, decide on structure. It will depend on the
length, complexity, and nature of your subject. Any memo longer than
half a page (or screen) requires a structure — and the structure should
be apparent to your reader. Otherwise your memo will seem to ramble.
Your reader will have a hard time remembering your points and how they
hang together.

If what you want to say falls into conventional outline form — for
instance, three main points, each supported by several examples, with a
comment or two on each example — your outline will serve as your
structure. A clear structure helps your reader to remember your points.
It also makes your memo easy to refer to.

Some memos are actually complex reports or recommendations, running a
half-dozen pages or more. In any such memo, start by outlining what
you’re going to cover.

Here’s what is in the package:

4-page kickoff ad for the WSJ and FT

2-page follow-up ads

2 TV commercials

Media Plan, including role of Internet

Agency POV on what advertising will accomplish Recommendation:

Recommend that we commit $10M (media and production) to launch the
campaign in mid-September.

Need to commit to the media and begin production of television by July
26 in order to make mid-September launch.

Do you agree?

Please let us know your comments and approval to proceed by Monday July
26.

Or write a brief covering memo and attach your report or plan as a
separate document. This works well for major papers.

One useful structure is often overlooked: a simple series of numbered
points. It has many advantages.

1.

It suits your purpose exactly when you wish to make several loosely
related observations on a single subject.

2.

It eliminates the need to write connectives. When you’re finished with
one point, you plunge directly into the next.

3.

It organizes your thoughts visually for your reader.

4.

Your numbered sections can be as long or short as you wish. Some can be
a single sentence, others two or more paragraphs. All that matters is
that each number should indicate the start of a new and distinct
thought.

5.

Numbers make your memo easy to refer to.

4. End with a call to action

Say what you expect to happen as a result of your memo — exactly what
must now be done, by whom, and by when. Be specific.

We need to move on the new products organization. I need your thoughts
on candidates by end of business on Friday.

We need a new strategy for increasing attendance at the benefit before
we send the invitation out.

If your memo replies to questions raised by somebody else, simply stop
when you’re finished. Don’t waste your reader’s time with such homilies
as

“I hope this answers your questions.” Since it goes without saying that
you hope you’ve answered them, go without saying it.

If your memo is a report, draw conclusions from what you saw or heard or
found out. Specify how certain you feel about your conclusions. Some
will be beyond question, others purely speculative. Tell your reader
which are which.

5. Send handwritten notes

Brief memos written by hand save time and by their nature are more
personal and direct. Praise and appreciation can be especially effective
in handwriting:

George:

That’s sensational news about Acme. Get some rest now — you deserve it!

Susan:

YOUR REPORT IS SUPERB. I’LL REACT TO YOUR RECOMMENDATIONS AS SOON

AS I GET BACK FROM FARGO.

Since handwriting is personal, make sure whatever you write sounds
personal.

6. Be careful with humor — or anger

Don’t try to be funny in memos unless you are positive that all your
readers will get the joke. That includes people who may not be on your
list but might see a copy of your memo. Avoid irony or sarcasm. Somebody
will take it straight and get upset. People can brood for days over an
innocently intended witticism.

As for anger, when you get angry in person, you leave nothing behind
other than the memory of your behavior. When you put it in writing, you
leave a permanent record. You may be sorry about that, after you cool
down. Angry memos do have their place. A good rule is to write it when
you’re angry, but don’t send it until the next day, when you have cooled
off enough to reflect on the consequences. This is particularly
important with email, which is all too ready to indulge your
spur-of-the-moment fury.

Should it be a memo at all? Even Procter & Gamble, which set the pace
for the modern business memo, is reported to be deemphasizing it to meet
the pace of the Internet age. An Italian proverb says: “Think much,
speak little, write less.” Sometimes the most efficient delivery of a
message is still face-to-face. Just drop by the other person’s office.

How to Write a Business Letter

There are times when only a letter will serve your purpose. A formal
letter on a company letterhead carries an aura of importance that e-mail
can’t match and phone calls don’t approach. Legal and financial matters
call for precision and detail in a form that can be easily referred to.
There is no substitute for a handwritten note of thanks,
congratulations, or sympathy.

Receiving and opening a first-class letter still is a pleasing ritual
for some people. Here are ways to make sure you never let down any
reader thus prepared for your message.

1. Get the name and address right

A misspelled name gets you off on the wrong foot. It suggests to the
reader that you don’t care, that you’re a sloppy person. Check all
names, no matter how much trouble it takes — on the envelope and in the
letter, the names of individuals and of firms and organizations.

Use Mr. or Ms. — many people appreciate a touch of formality and nobody
resents it. But leave it out rather than get it wrong when you aren’t
sure what gender you’re writing to and can’t find out. Mickey, Terry,
Gerry, Sandy, and many other names come on both girls and boys.

Check every detail. Mail addressed incorrectly seems slipshod at best,
and at worst doesn’t arrive. Always put a return address on the
envelope.

The stamp might fall off, or God knows what.

2. Think carefully about the salutation

“Dear —– “is a convention we’re stuck with, on paper if not in e-mail,
in any sort of formal communication. Odd and antiquated though it may
sound, efforts to avoid it seem artificial, self-conscious, and
downright rude.

We like the British custom of “tip and tail” — writing in the salutation
as well as the signature by hand on a printed or typed letter. In less
formal letters, a handwritten Peter or Hi Peter seems to work fine.

What comes after “Dear” is worth some thought. Use first names only when
you’re already on a first-name basis. Don’t become anybody’s pen pal

by unilateral action. Use titles — Dr., Judge, Professor, Senator — when
they apply.

An excellent but little-used alternative is to include both first and
last names: “Dear Joan Larson.” It is less formal than “Dear Ms.
Larson,” but doesn’t presume personal acquaintance, as “Dear Joan” does.
It’s an attractive way to address somebody you have met but who may not
remember you. Or somebody important and senior to you whom you know only
slightly. Or the other way around. Oscar Hammerstein II, the great
songwriter, wrote “Dear Joel Raphael-son” in a letter to Raphaelson,
then in college, about a review of South Pacific in the college
newspaper, and it seemed entirely appropriate, both courteous and
cordial.

3. Consider beginning with a title

Many business letters are parts of a long-term correspondence between
seller and customer, attorney and client, private firm and government
bureau. In such cases, it’s a good idea to follow the salutation with a
title.

Dear George:

ACME LEGAL ACTION: SECOND PHASE

A title identifies the subject at a glance and is a blessing for anybody
who ever has to dig out previous correspondence on it. Consider using a
title even on one-time-only letters to strangers. Nothing else so
quickly identifies the subject of your letter:

Dear American Express:

LOST CREDIT CARD — ACCOUNT #3729 — 051721

4. Make your first sentence work hard

Since titles on letters aren’t standard practice, they may strike you as
too abrupt or too impersonal for many situations. Then your first
sentence has to perform the function of a title. Your reader wants to
know at once what the letter is about.

Bill Smith brought to our attention your concern about Jane Jones’s
conversations with the XYZ bank.

There is no need for the written equivalent of small talk. The most
courteous thing you can do is spare your reader the trouble of puzzling
out what you’re getting at.

Annoying small talk

Dear Classmate,

As you know, we had a wonderful fifteenth reunion last June.

We can all be proud of the class gift we presented at that time.

Now we are well into the first year of the end-of-the-century campaign.

Gratifying directness

Dear Classmate,

It’s time to pull together our sixteenth annual gift to the university.
You’ll remember we gave a whopper at our fifteenth reunion — but the
need goes on.

What about letters responding to inquiries or on a subject introduced in
previous correspondence? Can you presume that the reader will know what
your letter is about, having brought up the subject himself in an
earlier letter?

Yes — up to a point. On the next page are two answers to a request for
information.

Too windy

Too abrupt

Dear Mr. Allen:

Dear Mr. Allen:

I am writing in response to your letter of June 24, in I’m sorry that

which you express an interest in the literature we’re out of the

describing our line of herbicides, with particular literature you

reference to the control of dandelions in residential asked for. Here’s

lawns. Unfortunately, we are all out of our pamphlets some information

on this subject, but perhaps the following information that may include
will be of assistance.

what you need.

The letter on the right presumes too much. If Mr. Allen, who may write
dozens of letters daily, doesn’t happen to remember exactly what he
wrote about to this particular firm, days or weeks ago, the first two
sentences don’t help him. He needs a speedy reminder of his inquiry —
more direct than the first letter, less abrupt than the second.

Dear Mr. Allen:

We’ve run out of our literature on controlling dandelions. I’m sorry,
and I’ll send it as soon as a fresh supply gets here.

Meanwhile, maybe this information will help.

The short first sentence reminds Mr. Allen of the subject and tells him
the chief thing he needs to know. Always identify your subject in your
first sentence.

5. Stop when you’re through

Just as some letters take their time to wind up and get going, many slow
down tediously before stopping. Avoid platitudes like these: Please call
if you have any questions.

I hope this answers your concern.

Please give this matter your careful consideration.

Unless you have something to say that is more than a formality, simply
stop. If your last sentence says what your reader would assume or do
anyway, as in the examples above, leave it out. Such stuff doesn’t sound
sincere or friendly. It sounds like what it is — routine formality. Your

ending won’t seem abrupt if your tone throughout the letter has been
warm and personal.

If you want to add a personal touch, make sure that what you say is
personal, and something you mean.

I’ve been reading about your heat wave and wonder how you’re getting
along.

George, customers like you make this business worthwhile.

6. Be specific about next steps

If you want your letter to lead to action, your last paragraph should
make clear what you would like that action to be. Or, if you’re taking
the action yourself, what you’re going to do:

Vague

Specific

We’re hoping to hear from you Please let us know your decision by soon.

August 1 so that we can meet your

deadline.

I’m looking forward to getting Are you free for lunch on Friday, July
17?

together with you to talk more. I’ll call that morning to confirm.

7. Use an appropriate sign-off

Gene Shalit, the Today show movie critic, signs his letters “Thine.”
It’s a personal trademark, like his bushy hairstyle. In general, though,
your sign-off isn’t the place to assert individuality. Keep it
conventional and appropriate to your tone.

“Yours truly” benefits from a lack of any specific silly meaning. It is
as rooted in convention as “Dear George,” and useful for that reason.

“Sincerely” and “Sincerely yours” are all right if you don’t mind
proclaiming something your reader should take for granted.

So many people have latched on to “Cordially” that we have become numb
to its mindless assertion of hearty friendship. Just don’t use it on
noncordial letters: “We’ve turned your case over to our attorneys.

Cordially…”

“Regards,” “Best wishes,” “All the best” are more personal than the
others and less formal, but not appropriate if you don’t know your
reader.

And there isn’t anything wrong with simply signing your name after your
last sentence.

How to Handle Some Common Kinds of Letters

OceanofPDF.com

Letters that ask for something

Say what you want, right away. Don’t start by explaining why you want
it. Your reader won’t be interested in your reasons before you reveal
what you’re asking for.

Dear Mr. Sullivan:

We are a new electronics firm and we need to set up a department to do
some basic research.

Accordingly it occurred to our president, Mr. Gene Schultz, that it
would be a good idea if we found out how some giant research departments
such as the Bell Laboratories were organized in the early days.

Our problem

Our thinking

Still hasn’t said what we want

Don’t start by expressing your appreciation.

Dear Mr. Sullivan:

I would greatly appreciate your help on a matter in which the Bell
Laboratories may be uniquely well informed.

Write that letter like this:

Dear Mr. Sullivan:

Do you have any literature that spells out how the Bell Laboratories
organized in its formative days? If so, would you send it to me and bill
me?

Says what we want, and that we’ll pay

We’re a small Internet firm selling office equipment, and your early
experience might help us figure out the best way to get going.

Your help would be invaluable to us.

Explains why

Thanks!

That’s the correct order for letters of inquiry; first, what you want;
second, who you are and why you want it; third, an expression of
appreciation for favors to come. If you’re asking for routine
information —

a copy of a published speech, records on your bank account, a price list
—

you can leave out the reason you want it and shorten your thanks.

OceanofPDF.com

How to say no

No, we don’t have a job for you. No, we won’t give you more credit.

No, we don’t agree that it was our fault and that we owe you a refund.
No, we can’t get your order to you in time for Christmas. Alas, we can’t
publish your story. Sorry, we regret we can’t contribute to your
charity.

Turning somebody down in writing may seem easier than doing it in
person, but in some ways it’s a lot harder. It is less personal and more
permanent.

Readers can’t see the expression on your face. Nor can they hear the
tone of your voice. Nor can they ask questions on the spot about things
that puzzle them or that they take issue with.

Your letter has to compensate for those disadvantages: It must be as
clear as you would be in person.

It must be as tactful and understanding as you would be in person.

Pay close attention to your tone.

You must anticipate your reader’s questions and objections and do your
best to answer them.

Put everything in your letter to this test: Would you say it and would
you say it in that way, if you were face-to-face with your reader?

“We regret to inform you that …” is the standard opening of millions of

“no” letters. It is hard to imagine anybody ever saying, “I regret to
inform you that. …” You’d say “I know how disappointed you’re going to
be, but there just isn’t any way I can do that” or “No, I don’t think
that will be possible — but how about this as an alternative?”

Let’s say you’re the manager of a store that sells refrigerators. After
using your top-of-the-line model for almost three years, a customer has
reported that it conked out on a hot weekend when he was away, and that
he returned to find all his food spoiled.

He wants you to replace the refrigerator with a new one, free, and to
charge nothing for the service call that put his refrigerator back into

commission — only temporarily, he fears.

Here is how some people would respond:

Dear Mr. Traggert:

I regret to inform you that we are unable to accommodate your request
for a new refrigerator. Our repairman reports that the trouble was minor
and is unlikely to recur.

At the time of purchase, you were offered a three-year service contract.
Had you accepted it, our service call would have cost you nothing
additional.

But since you did not accept it, we are required to charge you for the
service.

An institutional thumbs down

What a dope you were!

Our hands are tied

Boy, do we sound sincere

I sincerely regret any inconvenience this episode may have caused you
and hope that you will now get many years of satisfactory service out of
your Model 6034-Y.

Yours truly,

A turndown like this, with its chill, corporate tone, is all but
guaranteed to lose a customer for your store.

If you were to hear Mr. Traggert’s story at a dinner party, you wouldn’t
say “That episode may have been inconvenient for you.” You would respond
spontaneously with something like “That’s awful — what a way to come
home from a weekend!” Why not start your letter in the same human way?

Dear Mr. Traggert:

How terrible for you to come home from a weekend and find all the food
in your refrigerator spoiled. I can imagine how you must have felt.

The reader now knows that at least you appreciate his predicament. You
might continue in the same vein:

I quite agree that any refrigerator — and particularly a deluxe model
such as yours — should give you trouble-free service for a lot longer
than three years.

However, no manufacturer’s system of quality control is perfect —

which is why we advise our customers to invest in a service contract.

If I were to charge you nothing for your service call, you would, in
effect, be getting the benefits of a service contract without having
paid for it.

Agreeing is better than arguing

Puts problem in perspective

Appeals to reader’s sense of fairness. Note use of first person.

In considering your request for us to replace your refrigerator, I have
talked to the repairman who fixed it. He assures me that there is
nothing fundamentally wrong — the problem was caused by a freak failure
of a common bolt, which he has never seen happen before. He feels it is
most unlikely to recur: “A million to one against it,” he said.

I don’t think a new refrigerator would be any more likely to give you
the years of service you have every right to expect.

But should you have further trouble, I hope you will get in touch with
me at once.

Yours truly,

Seriously considers reader’s request, gives full reasons for

turning it down

Even the turndown is sympathetic

Leaves door open

In this letter, the author shows a personal interest in the customer’s
situation. He treats the demands as reasonable, and takes the trouble to
explain why he is turning them down. He leaves channels of communication
open — just in case. In short, his letter sounds as though he cares.

Never say no in anger — no matter how angry the other party may be.

You are in the position of power. Control yourself. Always appreciate
the feelings of the person you are turning down.

Never belittle anybody — never make a request or a complaint sound
foolish or unreasonable. Always show consideration for points of view
other than your own.

Never say no casually, in an offhand manner. Always take the trouble to
explain your reasons.

All of this applies just as forcefully to a form letter. Do everything
you can to make it sound as little like a form letter as possible.

The admissions staff at Dartmouth College has to turn down thousands of
applicants to every freshman class. A form letter gets straight to the
point that “we cannot offer you admission to the class of 2004 at
Dartmouth.” It then shows the kind of sensitivity to the impact of the
rejection that one would expect from a personal note, stressing that
being turned down should not be taken as evidence of inadequacy or
failure.

The selection process does not separate qualified from unqualified
applicants. We are convinced that most candidates for admission to
Dartmouth would thrive academically and personally at the College.

Of the many strong students in our applicant pool, an overwhelming
majority is destined to perform extremely well in their college years.
It is only the relatively small size of our first-year class that
prevents us from selecting more of our applicants. This is one of the
few times we wish we had a larger student body so we could accept more
students.

All letters that say NO would do well to say it with such sympathy for
the feelings of the reader.

OceanofPDF.com

How to collect money owed you

It’s hard to write a good collection letter. You don’t want to irritate
your reader. But you do want to get the money.

Watch your tone of voice. If you’re reminding somebody that a payment is
a few days overdue, don’t sound as though you’re about to call in the
lawyers.

Bad

Better

Dear Mr. Jones:

Dear Mr. Jones:

It has come to our attention that you

I’m writing to let you know that

have failed to remit your June payment, your June payment (due on June
which became overdue on June 12.

12) hasn’t reached us yet.

On the other hand, if you are going to take legal action, don’t
pussyfoot around. Come right out and say what you mean:

Dear Mr. Hinson:

Your June payment is now three months overdue. You have not responded to
three letters in which I asked if you thought there was an error in the
bill. I cannot reach you by telephone.

Therefore I’m asking our lawyers to collect the $104.56 that you owe us.

Watch your choice of words. Never use words that suggest that your
reader is a criminal. “Delinquent” is a favorite of bill collectors, as
in “You have been delinquent in meeting your payments for two months in
a row.”

Your object is to collect; irritating your readers is not likely to send
them to their checkbooks.

Don’t imply that your reader is a liar. If a woman has written you that
she paid her bill promptly on the first of each of the last four months,
and you have received no payments, don’t write, “You claim that you paid
your bill each …” The word “claim” reeks of disbelief. If she is lying,
it won’t help.

If she isn’t, it will infuriate her. Better to take her at her word and
suggest a positive next step:

Dear Ms. Bossler:

Although you’ve been mailing your payments promptly, we have no record
of receiving them.

Perhaps the error is in our records. Since you have been paying by
check, your bank will by now have returned two and perhaps three of your
canceled checks, if in fact we have deposited them.

Please look for them and if you find them, send us photocopies at our
expense so we can correct our records.

If you cannot find the canceled checks, we must assume the payments
somehow got lost. Would you then send us a new check covering at least
the first three payments, and preferably all four?

I enclose an addressed, stamped envelope.

Yours truly,

Assumes truthfulness

Admits possibility of own error

Suggests constructive action

Ask for payment courteously but firmly

Reduces likelihood of yet another “test” check

There is nothing in such a letter to irritate an innocent customer; nor
is there any loophole for further delay on the part of a guilty one.
Keep in mind that your purpose is not to make your reader angry, but to
get the money that’s owed you.

OceanofPDF.com

How to complain

Never write just to let off steam. Write to get something done — your
money back, or faster service, or a mistake rectified. Is the person who
will read your letter at fault for what went wrong? If not, there’s no
point in getting sore in your letter. While anger has its place in
correspondence as in life, more often than not you’ll get better results
from a cool, lucid statement of what’s gone wrong and what you’d like
done about it.

Include everything your reader needs to know to take action — account
number, item number, pertinent dates, form numbers, photocopies of
canceled checks, photocopies of bills. If you leave anything out, you
may have to wait through another round of correspondence before you make
progress.

Put your complaint and what you want done about it in the first
sentence.

The sweater I ordered for my son’s birthday never arrived. Please send
another immediately.

Ask for a reply with a specific statement of what the next step will be:
Please let me know what action you plan to take, and when.

If you are not the person who handles this, please get my letter to the
right person at once. And please let me know that you’ve done so, and
who it is. I’d appreciate that information by Friday, May 10, at the
latest.

Be clear. Be complete — and you can toss in a heartrending description
of what you have suffered. Be firm. Be courteous. That’s the kind of
letter that usually gets fast results. If it fails, raise hell. Write to
the head of the organization and include all correspondence. Nine times
out of ten you’ll get satisfaction from the boss.

OceanofPDF.com

How to answer complaints

Never be defensive. If the complaint is reasonable, say so — and say
what you’re going to do about it. Neiman Marcus, the Dallas-based chain
of department stores, has built much of its reputation on its
responsiveness to customers. Here is how then-Chairman Richard Marcus
replied to one customer’s complaint:

Dear Ms. Klugman:

I am astonished to learn of the shoddy service you recently received
from our Mail Order Department, and there is no excuse for the lack of
response and discourteous conversation you had with a member of our Mail
Order phone staff.

I’m asking Mr. Ron Foppen, senior vice-president and director of our
Mail Order operation, to investigate this matter immediately, and he
will personally contact you within a few days.

I apologize for any inconvenience and embarrassment we may have caused
you, and trust that we will have the opportunity of serving you better
in the future.

Yours sincerely,

Richard Marcus

Accepts the complaint at face value

Says what he’s going to do about it

Apologizes

Asks for continued business

Far from being defensive, Mr. Marcus comes right out and calls the
store’s service “shoddy” and says that “there is no excuse” for it.
Despite

the cliché apology, “for any inconvenience we may have caused you,” the
entire letter sounds personal, sympathetic, and responsive.

What if you feel that the complaint lacks any justification? Say so, but
be courteous. Intelligent readers are good at detecting the slightest
hint of irritability or impatience. You should be at least as courteous
on paper as you would be in person. Forthright and direct. Never
sarcastic or rude.

OceanofPDF.com

[]

When to use very short letters

A short letter — sometimes no longer than a sentence or two — can be
highly effective.

It can establish your interest.

Dear Mr. Woodrow:

Your proposal interests us a lot. We’ll get back to you as soon as we’ve
sorted out our budget problems for next year — no later than the end of
next week.

It can let your reader know what’s happening, and demonstrate your
thoroughness.

Dear Ms. Pruitt:

Half your shipment went out this morning, air express. The other half
follows next Monday, parcel post, as you requested.

It can say thank you.

Dear Helen:

I hope you can keep Dan Murphy on our account forever. He’s the best
sales representative I’ve ever dealt with.

Important decisions, however, are seldom made impersonally in memos or
letters or e-mail. “The people who remember that something meaningful
and constructive happens when two people are in the same room having a
face-to-face communication — and conversely that something destructive
happens when people hide behind technology to communicate — will be

happiest and most successful in the new environment,” says Mark
McCormack, president and CEO of International Management Group, the
leading sports marketing company. Even as electronic communication
continues to spread, talking to the other person is still decisive.

Churchill’s memos got into the subject fast: Prime Minister to General
Ismay 8 August 1943

I have crossed out on the attached paper many unsuitable names.

Operations in which large numbers of men may lose their lives ought not
to be described by code-words which imply a boastful and overconfident
sentiment, such as “Triumphant,” or, conversely, which are calculated to
invest the plan with an air of despondency, such as

“Woebetide,” “Massacre,” “Jumble,” “Trouble,” “Fidget,” “Flimsy,”

“Pathetic,” and “Jaundice.” They ought not to be names of a frivolous
character, such as “Bunnyhug,” “Billingsgate,” “Aperitif,” and

“Ballyhoo.” They should not be ordinary words often used in other
connections, such as “Flood,” “Smooth,” “Sudden,” “Supreme,”
“Full-force,” and “Fullspeed.” Names of living people — Ministers or
Commanders- — should be avoided; e.g., “Bracken.”

1.

After all, the world is wide, and intelligent thought will readily
supply an unlimited number of well-sounding names which do not suggest
the character of the operation or disparage it in any way and do not
enable some widow or mother to say that her son was killed in an
operation called “Bunnyhug” or “Ballyhoo.”

2.

Proper names are good in this field. The heroes of antiquity, figures
from Greek and Roman mythology, the constellations and stars, famous
racehorses, names of British and American war heroes, could be used,
provided they fall within the rules above. There are no doubt many other
themes that could be suggested.

3.

Care should be taken in all this process. An efficient and a successful
administration manifests itself equally in small as in great matters.

OceanofPDF.com

6 Writing for an Audience: Presentations and

Speeches

People have come to listen. You have their attention, at least at the
start.

If you don’t want to lose it, don’t waste their time. Don’t bore them.
Talk to them, not at them.

When preparing any kind of presentation or speech, the most basic
principle is to think about the audience. Each is different and has
special interests. What are the backgrounds of the people, and why are
they there?

What’s on their collective mind? Is the setting formal or relaxed? Are
you speaking in the middle of a busy workday or after a heavy evening
meal? It all makes a difference in what you say and how you say it.
Writing for an audience is different from writing to be read.

OceanofPDF.com

The logic of business communication In the business world, there is a
logic — a discipline of thinking and communication — that pushes
projects, solves problems, sets plans, and moves ideas to action. To
those in government or education and nonprofit institutions, it is
identified and welcomed as “businesslike.” In business, it is taken for
granted.

The form of communication evolves. The internal memo is fading, replaced
in many cases by e-mail. For major recommendations and proposals, formal
papers have been displaced for the most part by presentations —
face-to-face. Instead of writing for a reader, it is writing for an
audience.

The principal form of presentation in most organizations has become the

“deck,” jargon for page after page of bulleted points serving as a
framework for spoken elaboration. The name probably derives from a deck
of papers (like deck of cards), but decks can be delivered on overhead
slides or Power Point slides on a computer, simply a deck on a screen or
monitor. There’s just one constant — decks are invariably horizontal.
Sometimes the presenter even disappears, as when there’s a request to
“Send me your slides,” evidence of how pervasive this form of
communication has become.

While decks lack the precision and nuances of carefully crafted memos or
papers, it’s not productive to mourn the loss. Decks are reality, the
business tool that gets things done. And the deck has its own merits, in
stimulating debate and carrying discussions through several layers of
management.

One of the renowned practitioners of presentation decks, the McKinsey
consulting firm, uses them effectively in client “engagements.” Writing
in The New Yorker, Nicholas Lemann describes the McKinsey approach: The
aim of the engagement is not to give the client reading material, it’s
to reduce the issue to its pulsing essence. The client team comes into
the room, you distribute the deck, and crisply, calmly,

rationally, brilliantly, you make your “clunk points,” marching through
them inexorably to the one unerring strategic conclusion.

Reducing the issue to “its pulsing essence” is what a well-done deck
does best. Only key points on each page, as few words as possible. But
the points on the page must point to something — some action.

The format carries the audience on a flow of logic: Objective

Background

Facts

Conclusions

Recommendations

Next steps

In the Memorial Sloan-Kettering exhibit that follows: INTERNET STRATEGY
is the Objective.

INTEREST IN INTERNET FOR MEDICAL INFORMATION is Background.

DRIVERS OF GROWTH are Facts to be considered.

LEVERAGING THE INTERNET is the Conclusion.

The Recommendation is AN AUTHORITATIVE WEB SITE.

Funding and Control of Content are NEXT STEPS.

OceanofPDF.com

A TYPICAL PRESENTATION DECK

MEMORIAL SLOAN-KETTERING CANCER CENTER

Internet Strategy

Americans are Increasingly Looking to the Internet for Health and
Medical Information

[Chart showing growth of on-line health and medical information]

Drivers of Growth

Consumers taking more active role in managing their health

[Survey]

Internet enables patients to educate themselves on health-related topics
[Research]

Managed care reducing consumers’ access to physicians, driving them to
seek alternative sources of information By Leveraging the Power of the
Internet, MSKCC Can Deliver Its Mission to a Much Broader Audience

MSKCC Mission:

“The progressive control and cure of cancer through programs of patient
care, research, and education”

Education — [Access to knowledge, disseminating findings]

Patient Care — [Access to expertise, patient information]

CancerSmart will be the Authoritative Web Site for Information and
Medical Advice

Cancer prevention, detection, and treatment improvement in the quality
of life for those with the disease and their familie Although There are
a Number of Medical Sites, Some with Cancer Info, None Offer the Breadth
and Depth of the Proposed Site

[Examples — general health, cancer organizations, specialty sites,
medical advice]

To arrive at that simple structure requires a disciplined analysis of
every element — alternatives, implications, costs, or any other factor
that must be weighed.

A useful model to help organize that analysis, especially for complex
decisions, is the Pyramid Principle, developed for McKinsey by Barbara
Minto:

OceanofPDF.com

THE PYRAMID PRINCIPLE

The easiest order is to receive the major, more abstract ideas before
the minor, supporting ones. And since the major ideas are always derived
from the minor ones, the ideal structure of the ideas will always be a
pyramid of groups of ideas tied together by a single overall thought.

PURCHASE A LARGE FRANCHISE

Grow

Positive

faster

financial

Easy to

than

impact

absorb

industry

Large

Few

Low

Growing Rising Separate Same

Simple

market competitors cost

sales

profits business managers controls

Within that pyramidal structure, the ideas will relate vertically — in
that a point at any level will always be a summary of the ideas grouped
below; and horizontally — in that the ideas will have been grouped
together because they present a logical argument.

While not every presentation fits neatly into a pyramid structure — each
must reflect the business issue under consideration — the principle can
be helpful in organizing the logic and thinking. Minto notes that most
people only have a hazy notion of their ideas when they sit down to
write, and cannot know precisely what they think until forced to work it
out. “How do I know what I think,” asked novelist E. M. Forster, “until
I see what I write?”

How to Organize a Presentation

Organizing a presentation is a combination of clear thinking (the
pyramid principle, for example) and clear communications (points that
follow here).

The setting is most likely a conference room. It’s a business
environment.

Everything you say, everything you show, every device you use, must move
you toward your objectives in a businesslike fashion.

1. Keep things simple — keep them on target

Start with specific, written objectives — and a strategy. You need a
theme to give your presentation unity and direction, and to fix your
purpose in your audience’s mind. Make it a simple theme, easy to
remember, and open with it, using a headline to state it:

DOUBLE YOUR SALES

CUT YOUR COSTS

NEEDED: A NEW BALLPARK

MORE FUN FOR BOSTONIANS

Tie every element in your presentation to the theme. If you’re using
charts, put your theme all by itself on one chart and place it where it
will be visible throughout the presentation. This keeps the people in
your audience —

sometimes sleepy, often distracted, always with lots on their minds —
focused on your theme (and message).

2. Tell your audience where you’re going

Show an agenda that lists the points you are going to cover. Describe
the structure of your presentation, and say how long it will take.
Estimate time conservatively — err on the long side rather than the
short side. A presentation that is promised for twenty minutes and goes
twenty-five seems like an eternity.

The same thing promised for thirty minutes seems short in twenty-five,
crisp and businesslike.

Throughout the meeting, refer to the agenda to keep your audience on
track.

Prepare a presentation book the audience can keep, and tell them at the
start that

you’ll give them copies after the meeting. This will relieve them from
taking voluminous notes (instead of listening), so you’ll get their full
attention.

Do everything that’s been asked — and a little more. Be precise and
complete in covering what was requested. If you cannot cover some point
or other, say so and say why.

3. Talk about them, not about us While you are talking about your
credentials and your achievements, the people in the audience are
thinking about their organization, their business, their problems. The
biggest single mistake in presentations is to start by cataloging your
credentials, telling people how terrific you are.

The authors learned in the advertising business that the best
presentations soliciting new business started with research in the
prospect’s market. Even small-scale studies riveted the audience from
the start. These insights into the prospect’s problems set up the
agency’s recommendations.

Our credentials came at the end, and were often not needed. By then, we
had made the sale or not.

Relate what you offer to your audience’s needs. Present everything
possible in terms of benefits to the audience.

4. Think headlines, not labels

Presenters often have impressive data on their charts, but fail to
extract what the data shows, so the audience doesn’t understand what the
numbers prove.

What does your data say? Headings on charts should tell the audience how
to think about the numbers:

Use

Instead of

“Low price competition is gaining” “Trends”

“Our edge is service”

“Why Acme?”

“Insurance ratings are a problem” “Constraints on business”

“We have to improve service”

“Conclusion”

Use headings to establish your main points. Guide the audience by
numbering them on charts or slides, telling people how many you have.

Introductory Strategy

1.

Small markets before large ones.

2.

Three new markets every six months.

3.

Concentrate construction in spring and summer.

Read every word on the screen or chart to the audience. Don’t
paraphrase.

Some presenters think it is unnecessary, even childish, to read
verbatim. But no matter what you do, your audience will read what’s in
front of their eyes. If what they are hearing is something other than
what they are seeing, they will be distracted and confused. Read
everything up there, then comment or expand on it. You will no longer be
competing with your slides or charts for your audience’s attention.

If your style is to ad-lib, put only key words or phrases on your charts
or slides.

Problems

Price

Japan

Quality control Sweden

Face the audience when you present. Many people turn their backs and
read from the screen, especially when using overhead slides. Work from
the slide itself or from a script. It pays to avoid dark rooms with
slides (particularly after lunch). Computer projection or charts keep
the lights on and the audience alert.

5. Involve the audience

Look for interesting visual devices to present dry, routine materials. A
little creativity goes a long way. New computer programs make it easy to
do colorful things with pie charts and bar charts. Newsmagazines hire
top artists to make their charts interesting and clear. USA Today is
particularly adept at charts, and runs at least one every day in the
lower left-hand corner of the front page. Study the techniques of these
publications — and borrow from them.

Think of ways to involve your audience. Play games with them. Invite
people to guess the answers to questions, or to predict the results of
research — before you reveal them.

Try to add something extra, something unexpected. It demonstrates more
than routine interest. You might play tape recordings of customers
describing your audience’s product, or quote a relevant passage from a
speech your audience’s chief executive made years ago, or show an
excerpt from yesterday’s TV news that illuminates or reinforces an
important point.

David Ogilvy was famous for adding drama to his presentations. To make
his point about the importance of hiring the best people, he presented
his directors sets of Russian dolls — those nesting dolls that come
apart to reveal successively smaller dolls inside. Around the smallest
doll was a slip of paper with this message:

If we hire people who are smaller than we are, we shall become a company
of dwarfs. If we hire people who are bigger than we are, we shall become
a company of giants.

“Hire people who are better than you are,” Ogilvy commanded, “and pay
them more if necessary. That’s how we’ll become a great agency.” Nobody
forgot the Russian dolls — they dramatized the message.

Your dramatic flourishes must be relevant to your point. Almost everyone
has been to big show-biz presentations where the entertainment
overwhelms the message. Go easy on technology, which can take on a life
of its own. Software programs create slides that “build,” “dissolve,” or
“wipe,” techniques that can add interest — or distract. Remember you’re
in business, not show business, and must communicate in order to
persuade.

6. Finish strong

“Oh, give me something to remember you by” goes the song. As soon as
you’ve gone, your audience is likely to turn its attention to other
things —

perhaps to presentations competitive to yours. Leave something to
remember you by.

Don’t let a meeting drift off into trivia. Close with a summary and a
strong restatement of your proposition or recommendation. For major
presentations,

look for a memorable, dramatic close — something visual, perhaps a small
gift that symbolizes your main point.

Keep your promise about how much time you’ll take. Running longer than
you said you would at the outset shows a lack of discipline.

Presenters often sprout wings and fly when confronted with an audience.

They expand, tell anecdotes — and hate to sit down. If what you’ve
written is exactly on time in rehearsal, you’ll probably run over in
performance. If you’ve been allotted twenty minutes, write for fifteen.

Leave time for questions — the Q and A session lets the audience get to
know you better and could tip the decision your way. And prepare for
questions. As you’re writing, be alert to your inevitable weak spots.
What are the holes in your argument? What alternatives did you consider?
If you cannot build the answers into your presentation, be ready to
handle them — briefly and respectfully, so the questioner will feel
smart to have asked.

Edit — to shorten. Reorganize — to make sure your message is clear.
Revise

— to make it sound like you, speaking naturally.

Rehearse — always with props. You may think you know how you’re going to
handle your charts and other visual materials, but each presentation
seems to present problems of its own. If you can, rehearse in the room
where the presentation will take place. Go through your entire
presentation at least twice.

Only an amateur worries about overpreparing and losing an edge. The
better you know what you’re doing, the more spontaneous you’ll seem.

Speeches That Make a Point

“You start with trying to figure out what you want to say,” says
speechwriter Peggy Noonan, who contributed to many of Ronald Reagan’s
most effective speeches. Her experience is that “… it is harder to
decide what you want to say than it is to figure out how to say it.”

Most people have a terrible time knowing where to begin in writing a
speech.

The answer is not to hunt for a great opening. Not to ask around for the
latest joke. The place to start is to think about who is in your
audience and decide what you want to say to them.

Decide what single point you want them to take away. Then start writing.
You can put down anything that gets you into what you want to talk
about, no matter how clumsy it seems. There’s time to polish it later.
The point is to get rolling.

Immerse yourself in your subject long before you write. Read about it,
make notes of lines that might be used, illustrative stories, items in
the news that bear upon it. All will help you settle on a theme. The
next step is a broad outline, with three or four major points and
examples or subpoints under each. (One of the authors now does this on
his computer.)

Now’s the time to form a picture of the speaking situation. Is it an
after-dinner address, a lecture, a seminar? Are you the only speaker or
one of several?

Whom do you follow on the program? Will the audience be sleepy? Keep the
situation in mind as you write. It will make a difference in what you
say as well as in how you say it.

In writing a speech, it helps to think about addressing one individual
rather than a faceless audience. What you write should sound exactly
like you talking to somebody.

Another trick that often works: Cross out the first several paragraphs.
You’ll often find your opening line halfway down the first page. Most of
us have a tendency to warm up too long before throwing the pitch.

1. Frame the subject with a point of view

Some cynics maintain that the subliminal title of every speech is “How
to Be More Like Me.” While your audience might not look forward to a
speech that actually had such a title, good speeches nearly always
express a strongly held personal point of view.

H. L. Mencken compared two speeches by President Harding.

The first was on the simple ideals of the Elks: It was a topic close to
his heart, and he had thought about it at length. The result was an
excellent speech — clear, logical, forceful, and with a touch of wild,
romantic beauty.

But when, at a public meeting in Washington, he essayed to deliver an
oration on the subject of Dante Alighieri, he quickly became so obscure
and absurd that even the Diplomatic Corps began to snicker.

Your title should reflect your point of view. A tip-off to the lack of a
point of view in a speech is a lazy title or no title at all. “Remarks
Before the Seventh Annual Conference.”

Speech titles are different from movie or book titles, which are
designed to sell tickets or books. You already have your audience there
— to hear your

speech as a professional duty. The less it feels like a duty and the
more it can be anticipated with pleasure, the more likely you are to get
full attention and to register what you want to say. An interesting
title can create that sense of pleasurable anticipation.

Here are some good titles:

The Tree That Grows to the Sky (on Wall Street) Nonprofits: Five
Additions to the Ten Commandments How to Keep Your Ads Out of Court

Web Sites I Have Known

When Will the Bubble Burst?

Ideas that you believe in make good speeches. Tom Peters, author of In
Search of Excellence, advises not to accept any topic that you don’t
feel strongly about: “Stick to topics you care deeply about, and don’t
keep your passion buttoned inside your vest. An audience’s biggest
turn-on is the speaker’s obvious enthusiasm.”

2. Start fast

It may be “an honor and a privilege” to have been invited to speak, but
that is not what people came to hear. Plunge into what you want to say.
The occasion may require some pro forma opening courtesies, but keep
them as short as possible.

Adlai Stevenson lost his presidential race against Eisenhower, but
gained a reputation as one of the most graceful public speakers. His
first appearance after being nominated (and endorsed by then-president
Harry Truman) started on this note:

I accept your nomination — and your program.

I should have preferred to hear those words uttered by a stronger, a
wiser, a better man than myself. But after listening to the President’s
speech, I even feel better about myself.

None of you, my friends, can wholly appreciate what is in my heart. I
can only hope that you understand my words. They will be few.

You don’t have to tell jokes. Are you funny? In small groups, do you
make people laugh? If not, forget it. If you do tell a joke or anecdote,
don’t build up to it (“On the way here tonight …”). Tell the joke. Make
sure your jokes are relevant to your point. Make sure they’re funny — by
trying them out ahead of time.

Start with that single point you want your audience to take away, then
conclude with a memorable way for them to do so. Don’t just repeat it
(“As I said at the beginning of this talk …”) but find a vivid image to
register the point.

3. Write your speech to be spoken

Don’t think of it as an oration. Think of it as a conversation with a
friend.

Ronald Reagan was a master at this. Here’s how he handled the explosion
of the space shuttle Challenger (with help attributed to Peggy Noonan).

He started by expressing grief:

Ladies and gentlemen, I had planned to speak to you tonight on the State
of the Union, but the events of earlier today have led me to change
those plans. Today is a day for mourning and remembering.

Nancy and I are pained to the core by the tragedy of the shuttle
Challenger. We know we share the pain with all the people of our
country.

This is truly a national loss.

After paying simple tribute to the seven men and women who died and to
their families, he spoke conversationally to children: And I want to say
something to the schoolchildren of America, who were watching the live
coverage of the shuttle’s takeoff. I know it’s hard to understand, but
sometimes painful things like this happen. It’s all part of the process
of exploration and discovery; it’s all part of taking a chance and
expanding man’s horizons. The future doesn’t belong to the fainthearted,
it belongs to the brave …

A moving and emotional talk — it’s hard to call it a speech. Reagan
talked to his audience.

Read aloud the draft of your speech, and edit it until it sounds like
you talking naturally. Ghostwriters can help, but your speech must
ultimately reflect you.

Never deliver a speech drafted by someone else before you have revised
it to sound like you.

4. Leave them thinking

A great speech is one that inspires the audience to think about a
subject from a fresh perspective. It helps a lot if you have the
credibility, if the audience perceives that you are speaking from
personal knowledge. Robert Rubin, described (in 1999) as “the most
successful Treasury secretary of this century,”

is known for making good decisions. He was thus in a good position to
focus his commencement speech at the University of Pennsylvania on
decision making.

His title: “A Healthy Respect for Uncertainty.”

As I think back over the years, I have been guided by four principles
for decision making.

First, the only certainty is that there is no certainty. Second, every
decision, as a consequence, is a matter of weighing probabilities.
Third, despite uncertainty we must decide and must act. And lastly, we
need to judge decisions not only on results, but on how they are made.

He closes with a reminder of a world of increased interdependence and a
plea to “recognize this reality and reject the voices of withdrawal …”
Heavy stuff, even for a commencement, but important — and something that
will leave at least some of the audience thinking.

5. No speech was ever too short

On your way out after a speech, do you remember ever thinking it was
good

— but a little too short? Most good talks take less than twenty minutes.

Consider what you have so often had to sit through, and how much better
it could have been said in few words.

When Theodor Geisel, who wrote as Dr. Seuss, was awarded an honorary
college degree, he determined he would respond with the best speech ever
—

and the shortest. “Kids hate long speeches,” he said. “They have other
things on their minds at graduation.” Here is his entire talk: My Uncle
Terwilliger on the Art of Eating Popovers My uncle ordered popovers

from the restaurant’s bill of fare —

And, when they were served,

he regarded them

with a penetrating stare …

Then he spoke Great Words of Wisdom

as he sat there on that chair:

“To eat these things,”

said my uncle,

“you must exercise great care.

You may swallow down what’s solid …

BUT

you must spit out the air!”

And

as you partake of the world’s bill of fare,

that’s darned good advice to follow.

Do a lot of spitting out of hot air.

And be careful what you swallow.

Few of us — indeed only one of us — have Ted Geisel’s talent. But it
doesn’t take talent to figure out what you want to say, to say it, and
to sit down.

Making it sound easy

Consider speeches that have impressed you. The speaker seemed to be
talking to you, not reading to you. You’ve got to establish contact with
the audience. And that means looking out at the people, not down at the
script.

Some speakers have a bag of tricks that make it easier for them merely
to glance at the script now and then and spend most of their time
looking around at the people in the room. Ultimately, however, the only
way to do this is to rehearse. Rehearse what you have to say over and
over until you know it almost by heart. The better you know your speech,
the more spontaneous you will sound. And the more confident. What sets
the memorable speaker apart from the

[]

ordinary one is confidence and presence. As somebody’s mother-in-law
says,

“You get right up there and pretend you’re just as good as anyone else.”
Great speakers communicate a sense of energy and enthusiasm.

It’s difficult to be objective about your own speaking ability. But it
can help to listen to yourself rehearse on a tape recorder. Better yet,
take the traumatic step of seeing yourself on videotape. An illuminating
teacher.

The most effective speeches and presentations sound as if they have been
spoken, ad-lib, and not written down at all. Great presenters and
speakers make it all sound so easy and so natural that one assumes it
just pours out of them. It almost never does.

Lopping off two paragraphs improved this speech.

OceanofPDF.com

7 Plans and Reports That Make Things Happen

The best report ever written may have been Julius Caesar’s Veni, vidi,
vici. “I came, I saw, I conquered.”

Reports, like Caesar’s, describe the outcome of an operation. What’s
happened so far. A plan states what we want to happen. Both are
essential to moving forward.

Making things happen depends on clear communication. The consequences of
faulty organization and careless writing are severe.

Unpersuasive plans go straight to the files, unacted on. Sloppy reports
land in wastebaskets, unread. Problems go unrecognized or unsolved.

Opportunities are missed. Things that should happen don’t.

How to Write a Plan

Whether you are writing a battle plan or a business plan, your objective
is the same: action.

“For Montgomery,” wrote a biographer of the British World War II field
marshal, “it was all a question of having a plan. Once you had decided
what you wanted — what, in military terms, was your aim — you made a
plan, which you then implemented carefully by stages, maintaining the
aim and concentrating all your resources to achieving it.”

A plan starts with a clear statement of purpose. The capital campaign
for the New York Botanical Garden started:

This plan lays the groundwork for the Garden’s renaissance. It sets
forth the Garden’s future directions and identifies the resources
required to achieve financial stability and move forward with vitality.

[]

The plan then outlined the purposes of each of five proposed programs
within that plan:

New vigor and focus for botanical science — a new plant studies center,
endowing science, staffing the Institutes of Systematic and Economic
Botany, strengthening the library, improving Herbarium access, expanding
research in the forest, renovating laboratories, disseminating
scientific information.

An American horticultural showcase — the great conservatory, building
horticultural endowments, the propagation range, funding critical staff
positions, expanding stewardship of the forest, completing the
demonstration gardens complex, completing a plant inventory and
computerizing horticulture, improving turfgrass, rebuilding the
Montgomery Conifer Collection.

Environmental education — The Children’s Adventure Garden, environmental
education in the forest, hiring a graduate studies coordinator,
strengthening continuing education.

The visitor’s experience — providing additional parking, renovating the
lecture hall, creating new public programming, creating a new visitor
center, new signage program, undertaking audience research.

Financial stability — supporting the growth of the annual fund, building
endowment, developing earned income, conducting a capital campaign.

The seven-year $165 million campaign went over its target and achieved
almost all its goals.

You’re writing for someone who will either approve your plan, send it
back for more work, or reject it. Anything that confuses that decision
or throws the reader off the track makes approval less likely. Cut out
all irrelevancies. If you feel you have to touch on secondary or side
issues,

label them as such. Everything in your plan should pertain to your
stated goal.

1. Build a foundation of facts

Your choice of facts should be rigorously selective. Stick to facts that
relate to issues under consideration. Changes in the market. Competitive
moves. New products, services or technologies. Financial issues —

revenues, profit margins, return on investment. Economic or political
conditions. Many plans will call for a combination of such data — and
lots more besides.

Then draw conclusions from the facts. You can almost always infer one or
more principles — lessons learned, either from the situation at hand or
from others with analogous facts. Look for emerging patterns that could
guide decisions. Finally, show how your facts bear on the action you’re
proposing.

Never present facts on their own, like unstrung gems. If your facts
don’t link together you leave your reader with information that, like a
Mexican pyramid, doesn’t come to a point.

2. State your recommendations clearly

What steps do you propose to take? What are your reasons?

The strategic plan for the Trustees of Reservations, a land conservation
and historic preservation organization in Massachusetts, made four
recommendations (which they termed “aspirations”).

Aspiration 1: Save unprotected lands and properties of exceptional
conservation interest or of strategic importance to the quality and
character of the Massachusetts Landscape.

Aspiration 2: Offer visitors opportunities to enjoy and value our
properties and join us in assuring the preservation of their

scenic, historic and ecological features.

Aspiration 3: Engage and sustain active participation of a broad and
diverse public in the enjoyment, appreciation and stewardship of the
Massachusetts landscape.

Aspiration 4: Work with landowners, land trusts and government to
protect, interconnect and enhance high quality open space to serve
people and conserve nature throughout the Commonwealth.

A plan is a recommendation until it is approved. Then it becomes a
commitment to action. So it must describe, step by step, exactly what is
to be done.

In making your recommendation, it’s always wise to consider alternatives
and risks. Anticipate questions and answer them. Don’t cover up problems

— face them squarely. Make your proposal realistic. If your
recommendation is controversial, consider including a candid list of
pros and cons. Your cons should not be straw men (give the devil her
due).

3. Make it a call to action

The first draft of a major plank in U.S. policy after World War II came
through in a weakly worded, bureaucratic style.

It is essential to our security that we assist free peoples to work out
their own destiny in their own way and our help must be primarily in the
form of that economic and financial aid which is essential to economic
stability and orderly political processes.

Several drafts later, the same idea emerged as a ringing credo that
became known as the Truman Doctrine.

I believe that it must be the policy of the United States to give
support to free peoples who are attempting to resist subjugation by
armed minorities and forces.

I believe that it is essential to our security that we assist free
peoples to work out their own destiny in their own way.

I believe that our help must be in the form of economic and financial
aid.

Your goal is to leave no shred of doubt as to where you stand, and to
arouse enthusiastic support for the action you seek.

How to Write a Report

Some reports aid the planning process; some come after it, reporting on
progress or results. They cover events large and small — meetings,
trips, competition, developments, good news, bad news. An intelligent
appraisal of actual conditions is essential to progress. Report what is
happening, and what you think should be done about it.

1. Make it clear why you’re writing the report

Every report is written for a purpose.

A conference report, for example, has only one purpose: to record
decisions taken at meetings. It does not restate arguments, offer
opinions, or confer praise or blame. It records what was shown or
discussed. What was decided (not why). What action is required and who
will be responsible for it. When it is due. What money was authorized.
It covers actions and decisions — nothing else.

A competitive report covers competitive activity, a progress report
covers progress, and so on. What is the purpose, and why should anybody
care?

Try to engage the reader’s interest in the first sentence.

This reports on a management meeting at which a new salary policy was
decided.

The purpose of this report is to assess new competition — a product that
could cut our sales in half.

2. Give your report a structure

Whether you start with your recommendation or lay out the facts before
you reveal it, make clear where you are going.

Here is a structure that often works:

Purpose — why the reader should pay attention

Summary — no surprise endings

Findings — what facts can you marshal?

Conclusions — what patterns do you see?

Recommendations — what action do you propose?

Next steps — costs, timing, issues to be resolved There is no need to
parade all your information unless the reader needs every detail to
understand your report. Put into the body of your report only those
facts that are essential to your point. Relegate charts and supporting
data to an appendix.

3. State the facts fully and accurately

Newspaper reporters are trained to do this with the famous five Ws —

who, what, when, where, why (or how). Not a bad discipline for a writer
of reports (who is, literally, a reporter).

The major findings are that Homebrand sales for the year to date are off
28 percent, distribution is down 20 percent, and Alien’s crunchy new
product is being purchased by half of all heavy users.

An effective report states all the facts, unpleasant as well as
pleasant. It never inflates their validity. If you only visited ten
stores in two cities, don’t refer to an “extensive store survey.”

Firsthand observations lead to better reports. Get out of the office and
see for yourself what’s going on. A field trip often gives you more
realistic answers than any amount of statistics. Or it can lead you to
the right questions to ask. Generals go to the front to get a firsthand
sense of the action, because seeing things gives them a feeling for
what’s going on, against which to judge the thousands of faceless facts
that pour in to their headquarters behind the lines. Field trips are
also a source of ideas. Just as important, they supply the details that
add the breath of life to your reports.

Never trust your memory when collecting material for a report. Write
down everything you want to remember.

“The horror of that moment,” the King went on, “I shall never, never
forget!”

“You will, though,” the Queen said, “if you don’t make a memorandum of
it.”

—ALICE’S ADVENTURES IN WONDERLAND

4. Separate opinion from fact

Both are important; just make clear to your reader which is which. Like
the little boy in a newspaper cartoon who says to his father, “I asked
you for the facts of life, but what you’re giving me is opinions.”

Facts are facts, regardless of who is reporting them: “It’s twenty-four
degrees and the wind is from the northwest at fifteen miles an hour.”

opinions vary depending on the observer: “It’s a pleasant winter day —

brisk and bracing.”

You should never leave your reader in doubt as to what is opinion and
what is fact.

Opinion stated as fact

Opinion stated as opinion

The information would be

We’d all like to lay our hands on that

useful, but costs too much to information, but none of us thinks it’s
worth obtain.

what it would cost.

We can’t get started by May To get started by May 1, I suspect we’ll
have 1.

to go heavily into overtime.

The way you deploy your facts can give weight to your opinion. Include
the principal facts necessary to support your views. Face up to those
that weigh against you. But don’t throw in unnecessary or irrelevant
details just to show you’ve done your homework.

Facts are facts. conclusions and recommendations are always opinion.

How you choose facts, and how you marshal them, may well reflect the
point of view that you’re advocating. You can, and should, interpret the
facts. But your report will stand up better, especially should it come
under fire, if you make a conscious effort not to lump your facts and
your opinions into a single undifferentiated pile.

Readable Annual Reports

Public companies of all sizes are required to publish their annual
financial results and comment upon them to their owners, the
shareholders.

Likewise, schools and hospitals and other nonprofit institutions, which
once a year make their case to their communities and supporters. While
some use this opportunity well, a large number fail to think clearly
about either the audience or the message and publish a report that is
more design than substance. Many of them model their style on the worst
habits of bad business writing.

Full advice on annual reports is beyond our scope here, but we would
like to show how they can be down-to-earth — and readable.

The audience for the prose part of the annual report, as opposed to the
financials, is seldom the sophisticated investor or the financial
community.

Often used as a general purpose corporate brochure (“a good
merchandising tool”), the annual report is an opportunity for the chief
executive to report on the organization’s performance, its strategy, and
its potential.

In recent years, two of the largest and best-established companies in
the world, IBM and General Electric, have both used their reports to
position themselves as possessing the vigor of vibrant start-up
companies.

IBM is working to change its historic perception from conservative and
stuffy (“Big Blue”) to fresh and exciting (“New Blue”). The 1998 Report
doesn’t say “IBM” or “1998” on the cover — the only words are “Start
up,”

followed by this from CEO Lou Gerstner.

What makes 1999 different … is that a historic shift — something IBM
began talking about three years ago — is taking hold, and it’s reshaping
everything: how we work, how we shop, how we interact with our
governments, how we learn, what we do at home. Every day it becomes more
certain that the Internet will take its place alongside the other great
transformational technologies that first challenged, and then
fundamentally changed, the way things are done in the world.

Jack Welch described the kind of company he wanted General Electric to
become, in a GE annual report several years ago.

We want GE to become a company where people come to work every day in a
rush to try something they woke up thinking about the night before. We
want them to go home from work wanting to talk about what they did that
day, rather than trying to forget about it. We want factories where the
whistle blows and everyone wonders where the time went, and someone
suddenly wonders aloud why we need a whistle. We want a company where
people find a better way, every day, of doing things; and where by
shaping their own work experience, they make their lives better and your
company best.

Far fetched? Fuzzy? Soft? Naive? Not a bit. This is the type of
liberated, involved, excited, boundary-less culture that is present in
successful start-up enterprises. It is unheard of in an institution our
size; but we want it, and we are determined we will have it.

We like what Welch says, and we especially admire the plain way he says
it. The Economist now matter-of-factly refers to General Electric as

“the world’s most admired company.”

The founder of an Australian advertising agency, John Singleton, had
this to say in an annual report commenting on the acquisition of his
company by Ogilvy & Mather:

Well, I’ve never been so happy to admit I was wrong.

Just as I was 100% sure we needed an international partner to both grow
the business and give our young staff greater opportunity I also knew it
would come at a short-term cost.

I knew that a merger of this magnitude across so many communications
disciplines would inevitably disrupt clients, staff and

inevitably result in short-term set-backs for the greater long-term
good.

I was 100% wrong on all counts …

Such candor is refreshing — and agreeable to read.

A major trend changing annual reports is “plain language” reporting of
financial data. Much of the impetus comes from a Securities and Exchange
Commission directive to mutual funds, already showing results: Before

All of the funds offered in this Prospectus seek capital growth by
investing in securities, primarily common stocks, that meet certain
fundamental and technical standards of selection (relating primarily to
earnings and revenue acceleration) and have, in the opinion of the fund
manager, better-than-average potential for appreciation.

After

The fund managers look for stocks of companies that they believe will
increase in value over time, using a growth investment strategy
developed by American Century.

Warren Buffett, Chairman of Berkshire Hathaway, has long produced
reports admired for their literate insights as well as for the financial
results they disclose. Buffett takes the trouble to make the numbers
readable, proving in passing that there is no conflict between
intelligibility and success. Here is a selection from his preface to the
commission’s Plain English Handbook.

There are several possible explanations as to why I and others sometimes
stumble over an accounting note or indenture description.

Maybe we simply don’t have the technical knowledge to grasp what the
writer wishes to convey. Perhaps the writer doesn’t understand what he
or she is talking about. In some cases, moreover, I suspect that a
less-than-scrupulous issuer doesn’t want us to understand a subject it
feels legally obligated to touch upon.

Perhaps the most common problem, however, is that a well-intentioned and
informed writer simply fails to get the message across to an
intelligent, interested reader. In that case, stilted jargon and complex
constructions are usually the villains.

Buffett concludes with this useful tip:

Write with a specific person in mind. When writing Berkshire Hathaway’s
annual report, I pretend that I’m talking to my sisters. I have no
trouble picturing them: Though highly intelligent, they are not experts
in accounting or finance. They will understand plain English but jargon
may puzzle them. My goal is simply to give them the information I would
wish them to supply me if our positions were reversed. To succeed, I
don’t need to be Shakespeare; I must, though, have a sincere desire to
inform.

No siblings to write to? Borrow mine: Just begin with “Dear Doris and
Bertie.”

When even the numbers are easy to read and digest, we will really have
made progress.

BUSINESS PLANS FOR NEW VENTURES

First comes the idea, then comes the money. Before the money, there’s
the business plan. For the entrepreneur, it’s a one-time thing.

For any potential investor, there are many ideas and opportunities —

and many plans.

The profusion of possibilities is illustrated in a note by Professor
Bill Sahlman for his course at the Harvard Business School. He describes
his “ever growing stack of Internet based business plans, each proposing
to ‘revolutionize’ an industry, each ‘conservatively’

projecting at least $50 million in revenues within five years based on a
modest market share of under 10%, and each containing a projection of
likely investor returns of over 100% per annum.”

Every new venture has a “story,” the term replacing “business plan”

in some circles. Why should the investor believe your story?

PricewaterhouseCoopers says the business plan “must convey to the reader
that the company and product truly fill an unmet need in the
marketplace,” and lists the business issues to be addressed.

First, get to the point, and don’t be long-winded. Start with an
executive summary, to make the case quickly. Credibility is crucial —

it pays to be candid; it’s good to understate rather than exaggerate;
it’s vital to be clear.

Professor Murray Low at Columbia Business School identifies two top
priorities:

Who are the people? “I’d rather invest in an A team with a B idea than
the other way around.”

Is there a real customer? “Markets are abstractions.

There must be customers willing and able to pay.”

He also points out two glaring weaknesses in many plans: Mindless
optimism, — like saying all that is needed is a small percentage of a
large market. “That’s just hoping. How will the business be built?”

Sloppy presentation — like typos, spelling mistakes, careless grammar.
“They haven’t put the time in to make it right, so the plan will not be
read. The people may be OK on vision and the big picture, but you have
to question their execution.”

Investors seek confidence in a good business (and a well-written plan).

OceanofPDF.com

8 Recommendations and Proposals That Sell

Ideas

Whether you are in business, government, or the not-for-profit world,
you will have to sell your ideas in writing. In written recommendations
to committees or boards to take some action. In written proposals for
the funding of grants. However persuasive you are in person, you will be
asked to put it in writing.

The purpose is to persuade somebody — or, more often, a number of people
— to approve a recommendation or proposal, and agree to put it into
action. But many such documents leave their audience confused about what
is being proposed. Others are clear enough, but unpersuasive. Some are
so poorly put together that they cast doubt on the value of the project
or the competence of the proposer, and can even unsell a favorably
disposed audience.

Unless you are able to sell your ideas, you might as well not have had
them.

Recommendations That Persuade

All organizations spend lots of time preparing recommendations, often
with several options. Henry Kissinger used to say that State Department
memos commonly offer three options: the first leads to nuclear war, the
second to unconditional surrender, and the third is what they want you
to choose.

To get the decision you seek, keep in mind that you have been living
with the subject and your audience has not, or at least not with the
same

intensity. You have to bring people into your subject before you can
persuade them. Remember too that you are usually in competition with
other recommendations for finite resources. You must be more convincing
and make a persuasive case.

Here are some principles for making a persuasive case: 1. Think of it as
selling — not as presenting

Just laying out your views is not enough. You must marshal both logic
and passion behind your facts. Anticipate your audience’s reservations
and face them squarely. Instill confidence that you have thought hard
about potential pitfalls, and are fully prepared to guide the venture
around them safely and successfully.

That starts with the title — which should promise a benefit. Why is this
worth the reader’s time and attention?

2. Tell people where you are going

Your first paragraph should establish both your subject and its scope.

The strategy for Harry Truman’s successful campaign for the presidency
in 1948, spelled out in a forty-three-page memo, started with this
paragraph: The aim of this memorandum is to outline a course of
political conduct for the Administration extending from November, 1947,
to November, 1948. The basic premise of this memorandum — that the
Democratic Party is an unhappy alliance of Southern conservatives,
Western progressives and Big City labor — is very trite, but it is also
very true. And it is equally true that the success or failure of the
Democratic leadership can be precisely measured by its ability to lead
enough members of these three misfit groups to the polls on the first
Tuesday after the first Monday of November, 1948.

In pointing out where you’re going, it often helps to remind people
where you’re coming from. Persuasive recommendations usually include a
section on background — earlier decisions or familiar information into
which this recommendation fits.

If you have done an impressively thorough job in arriving at your
recommendation, it pays to spell that out in the background. To persuade
the board of managers of the New York Botanical Garden that its
recommendations were soundly based, a management consulting firm
summarized its wideranging activities:

Reviews with the staff of major programs and functions; analysis of
financial records, interviews with Board members; visits to three other
botanical gardens; comparison of the Board structure and fund-raising
activities with those of other comparable New York institutions;
preliminary interviews with foundations, corporations and government
officials to gauge the outlook for future funding.

This background, demonstrating that no stone had been left unturned,
prepared the audience to respond favorably to the report’s findings,
conclusions, and far-reaching recommendations.

For long recommendations, it’s helpful to start with an executive
summary. Include all main points, a sentence or two for each. Let the
full document fill in the details.

3. Lead people through with headings

It helps your audience to follow your train of thought if you keep it on
track with bulleted or numbered headings.

A recommendation to advertise on television headed each section clearly:
WHY TELEVISION? — It’s Media Smart

It Provides the Needed Extra Impact

It Extends the Person-to-Person Print Campaign

WHAT DID OUR RESEARCH SHOW? — Review of Objectives and Methodology

Television Findings — Breakthrough Quality was Key Television Shifted
Respondents’ Perceptions

Television Proved Unique Advantages over Print WHAT IS OUR CREATIVE
RECOMMENDATION?

TV Goals

Headings help put your points in the context of your total
recommendation.

4. Recommend — and do it early

This is a recommendation, not a story with a surprise ending. Busy
people don’t want to guess what you’re leading up to, so get to the
point quickly and clearly.

We propose that a new environmental program be launched within six
months.

The committee recommends a new organizational structure to focus more on
clients and markets.

Most recommendations involve a degree of pain — a new and expensive
investment, or a difficult trade-off. Delaying the bad news is not going
to help. Get it up front. Then lay out specific reasons in support. The
rationale for your recommendation is the heart of your argument. What is
the evidence?

Ogilvy & Mather recommended an expensive campaign of large newspaper ads
consisting mostly of text. To forestall a likely client objection that
“nobody reads long copy in advertisements,” the

recommendation cited numerous cases of ads with hundreds, even
thousands, of words that had produced terrific results: A single British
Travel Authority advertisement with over a thousand words attracted
25,000 responses. BritRail, a primary cooperator, reported “its best
sales year ever in the U.S.”

An all-type campaign for International Paper drew a thousand letters a
day commenting on the advertising or requesting reprints.

For Cunard, an advertisement with 26 separate paragraphs of information
paid for itself four times over in direct sales.

Specifics persuade. But they must be relevant and impressive — every one
of them. A chain of specifics is no stronger than its weakest link; the
weak one will attract the attention of your critics in the audience (and
distract your friends).

It’s wise to anticipate questions that are likely to be asked. But
sometimes a question that may seem devastating doesn’t really strike at
the heart of the matter. In such cases, reframe the question. The
question Ogilvy & Mather anticipated was “Does anybody read long copy?”
The recommendation reframed it so that the reply would reveal what the
questioner actually needed to know: “Does long copy sell?”

5. Emphasize the benefits of your recommendation There must be a payoff
in a reasonable time if your recommendation is to be accepted and acted
on. A recommendation by a management consultant emphasized these goals:

To achieve sustainable competitive advantage in cost, technology, and
systems quality.

To reach an appropriate return on investment.

To maintain the highest levels of customer satisfaction.

To improve the use of key people.

The recommendation went on to show how those objectives would be met.
Never fail to answer the main question your audience is asking, however
silently: “What’s in it for me?”

Proposals That Win Grants

Foundations and government agencies that grant money have an unhappy
dilemma: having to say “no” far more often than they say “yes.”

Much more money is asked for, and for deserving causes, than there is
money to give. Whether you’re applying to a federal agency or making
your case to a foundation, it is possible to stand out from the crowd.
And there will be a crowd.

Talking about measurable program results (“outcomes,” as they’re
termed), shows professional expertise — and makes your proposal stand
out. Here are some other principles:

1. Get to the point — fast

“I know the head of a major foundation who says he’s tempted to toss out
any proposal that doesn’t tell him quickly — in the first paragraph or
second — how much money is requested, and what it’s for,” says one
professional fund-raiser.

Not every foundation head is as tough as that one, nor should the
direction to tell it all in the first paragraph or two be taken
literally. But the nearer the beginning the better.

2. Show how your project meets their needs

Most funding sources have published the goals and criteria against which
they make their decisions. Your opening paragraph should show that you
understand this — and how your project fits. Here is the first paragraph
of a proposal from the National Organization on Disability to a
foundation that focuses its funds on supporting community programs: The
Community Partnership Program is N.O.D.’s flagship program, supporting a
network of 4,500 communities around the United States. This voluntary
network brings together citizens with and without disabilities in many
significant community-building activities.

It is our belief that American communities have the ingenuity and
initiative to address disability issues directly at the grassroots
level.

Be realistic in what you hope to accomplish. Better to identify a single
specific problem that you might actually solve than to appear to be
trying to cure all the ills of society.

Regardless of the outcome you promise, your own credibility is
important. How long have you been around? What is your track record?
It’s not enough just to establish the importance of your project. You
must persuade your reader that you can make it happen.

3. Organize to persuade

Many proposals make life easier for the decision maker — they are easy
to turn down because their authors don’t organize their material
persuasively. Typically there are a series of points, often numbered to
give the appearance of structure. But the proposal doesn’t relate the
points to one another or fit them together to make a case. Claims are
not supported by evidence. Facts, while impressive in themselves, don’t
bear on the argument.

Organizing material to make a persuasive case calls for logic, rigor,
and discipline. It is often the hardest part of writing, and bedevils
every writer engaged in advocacy of any kind. Many of the changes from
draft to draft of this book resulted from a struggle to connect examples
precisely to the

points they illustrate. We had to force ourselves to throw out a lot of
good writing that was not quite relevant.

Everything relevant, nothing extraneous — that should be your goal in
writing your proposal. To the extent you succeed, your proposal will
rise above your competitors’ for that all too limited pot of money.

4. Make it urgent

The thought that must be communicated is that the project might not
happen if there is no funding. “You can make the difference,” is one way
to get a “yes.”

The introduction of a proposal by the National Academy Foundation
identified the urgent need for an educated workforce to participate in
the advancement of the U.S. economy in an increasingly global
marketplace.

A review of recent educational findings reveals that we are far from
developing such a workforce or even one on parity with that of other
industrialized nations. For example, we find that American
schoolchildren are typically found at the bottom of international
comparisons of mathematics and science, and the majority of students
seeking Ph.D. degrees in mathematics and engineering from American
universities are from foreign countries.

For continuing programs, it is important to present a plan that will
assure some kind of continuing support after the grant runs out — so the
program doesn’t die.

5. Improve your product

While a well-written proposal is important, what really counts is a
strong, viable program. Applicants for grants are offering us an
opportunity, says Karen Rosa of the Altman Foundation. “We want to know
who they

are, what they do, and for renewal requests, did they do what they said
they would do.”

A proposal from the Brooklyn Youth Chorus gets high marks because it
describes a carefully constructed program and captures the essence of
the chorus through impressive statistics and heartwarming photos of the
kids.

The covering letter radiates accomplishment, then quickly moves on to
spell out how this successful group is working hard at getting better
and better.

The Russian tour was an absolutely great experience for the Choristers
and we are now starting our season with a wealth of scheduled
appearances. I am particularly excited about our October 17th Carnegie
Hall collaboration with the Montreal Symphony, conducted by Charles
Dutoit. The Brooklyn Youth Chorus Festival 2000 is shaping up to be a
great event as well.

The Chorus continued to grow in many ways during FY 1999. We completed
our strategic plan, increased enrollment, hired a Children’s Voice
Specialist and an Associate Conductor, started individualized vocal and
instrumental instruction, and opened a new Saturday chorus division.

During the coming year we will continue to expand enrollment, initiate
the new Intermediate Chorus, present our Festival, support other
choruses through our new Partnership program, and conduct a new series
of teacher-training workshops.

How important is the quality of the writing? Very important, says Rosa,
particularly in applications from educational programs. “Proposals
filled with spelling and grammatical mistakes drive me crazy. How secure
can we feel about your ability to teach kids if you can’t spell?” But,
she concludes, more time should be spent improving the product than
improving the proposal.

6. It need not be dull

A successful proposal, by the South-North News Service, to fund a world
affairs newspaper and teachers’ guide for U.S. secondary schools,

opened with an arresting image.

Oh, to be 14 years old.

The rigid antagonisms of the Cold War are crumbling. The white power
structure of southern Africa is coming face to face with reality.

But survey after survey shows us that neither the 14-year-olds nor their
teachers can find Vietnam or Brazil on a map, or tell the difference
between Tel Aviv and Cairo, or label the Indian Ocean or Antarctica.

Put colorful detail in your proposal, like this successful one by the
Hood Museum at Dartmouth College for a major exhibition, “The Age of the
Marvelous.”

During the 16th and 17th centuries, European culture was marked by an
intense fascination with the Marvelous, and those things or events that
were unusual, unexpected, exotic, extraordinary or rare.

The first requirement is to get read.

OceanofPDF.com

9 Asking for Money: Sales and Fund-Raising

Letters

Grumble all you want at the volume of your mail at home, made up of
catalogs, brochures, or letters asking for money for some product or
service or charity. It’s unlikely to abate, as long as there’s evidence
that direct marketing works. People do respond — to the right appeal.

The remarkable growth of direct mail was triggered by sophisticated
computer models, improved targeting of mailing lists, credit cards, 800

numbers, plus changes in lifestyles and shopping habits. Now the
Internet is spawning e-mail pitches (some unsolicited, some requested by
customers) which are faster, cheaper, and often get better response than
postal mail.

Direct mail on steroids, as some describe it.

While changes in technology have been a large part of this revolution,
what hasn’t changed is what to say to people (or how to say it) to get
them to respond and send money. Studies show that many successful
mailings use techniques that have been around since the 1930s — the same
basic elements (letter, brochure, reply card), the same kind of offer
(something for nothing, or a discount), a bill-me option, long letters
even to busy people who supposedly have no time to read.

The principles go back even further — to the Grand Bazaar in ancient
Turkey, suggests British direct marketing guru Drayton Bird. He draws an
analogy to contemporary media:

Why are so many big advertisers firing blanks on the Internet?

Because they think it’s an advertising medium. It isn’t. It’s a
marketing channel; a direct marketing medium. All Internet transactions
are direct.

Like the Turkish Bazaar (“they don’t just show, they sell”), direct
marketing is a retail medium. And nearly every technique direct
marketers use, says Bird, works as well or better on the Internet.

OceanofPDF.com

It pays to test

Whole books have been written about sales letters and fund-raising
letters, identifying dozens of principles employed by the pros. There is
only one that you can never ignore: test.

Many of the things you think you know, like “Nobody will read anything
that long,” often go out the window when you test. Emotional appeals
that you’re sure will pull responses, often don’t. If you have something
that’s working, be careful about changing any element without testing.
What turns out to be the crucial element sometimes surprises even
experienced pros.

Some organizations fly by the seat of their pants and don’t know what is
working and what isn’t. They seldom get full value from their efforts.
They don’t take advantage of the accountability of direct marketing.

The reader responds directly to the writer or organization; you count
the money that comes in and you know how you’ve done. It is common to
find that one mailing will produce many times the response of another
for the same product. It pays to test if you plan to mail to a
substantial number of people, or if you plan to mail more than once.

Testing is not just for large organizations. You will find techniques
for simple low-cost tests in many books on direct marketing (we suggest
one in the final chapter). If you cannot test, take advantage of the
testing of others.

When you receive the same mailing over and over, year after year, you
can be reasonably sure it has been proven in testing. Study it.

Don’t assume anything. And prepare to be surprised. Certain months (or
even certain weeks or days) are more productive than others. Sometimes a
higher price will produce more response than a lower one. People will
respond again and again to the same mailing — don’t change for the sake
of change. Long letters often pull better than short ones.

Important — test only one change at a time. If you test several, you
won’t know which helped (or how much).

OceanofPDF.com

The “true value” concept

The results you get from testing lead to another principle: Estimate how
much a customer is worth.

If you expect people to send money just once, the calculation is easy.

Will you get back enough money to cover the cost of the mailing plus the
cost of the merchandise — and leave you with a profit? If yes, go ahead.
If no, start over.

Most direct mail is in a different category — it goes to people who may
buy more than once:

Customers whose repeat orders you can reasonably expect — or whose
satisfaction with one of your products might prompt them to buy another.

Subscribers — to magazines, book clubs, record clubs, art clubs — who
well might renew their subscriptions or send in new orders.

Contributors to schools or hospitals or any local charity or cause, who
might well give again in future years.

For this kind of respondent, you can invest heavily in your initial
mailing — even if it loses money the first time around, as it often
does. This is the “true value” concept — what a customer is worth over
time.

The New York Red Cross found that it paid to send first-time givers a
free first-aid manual to convert them to donors — who were found to give
in four of the following seven years, and increased their donations 20
percent.

To decide how much to invest in each potential customer, you must know
how much each customer is ultimately worth. Often you’ll have to
estimate and make some assumptions. While not an exact science, it is
simple arithmetic.

What Works Best in Sales Letters Direct mail specialists can cite many
principles as to what works best in sales letters. Two of those
principles invariably come first.

OceanofPDF.com

Make sure the offer is right

The professional direct mail writer works first on the coupon, not the
letter. What is the offer? How should it be stated? What are the terms?

The offer is what gets the action — especially when product differences
are small or short-lived. Over the years, mailers have offered reduced
prices, premiums, charter subscriptions, free-trial offers, or a
combination of these.

Airline mileage is the currency of many current offers. It is
accumulated by millions of travelers, who see it as having high value.

Discount brokers used to compete on price, but price wars in the
category have ended. “Open an E*TRADE account,” says a mailing from the
on-line broker, “and earn a sign-up bonus of up to 10,000

Mileage Plus miles.”

You may well be amazed how something free, however small, can add to the
power of a sales letter. A free first copy, a free membership
certificate, a free pin, free trials. Even a simple pamphlet, perhaps
one you’ve already printed for another purpose, can be an effective free
offer —

and a cheap one.

Small changes in an offer, or even in the way the offer is presented,
can make an immense difference in response. If you test nothing else,
test your offer.

“Star bursts, underlining, the ‘P.S.’ — those don’t affect the results
that much,” says Howard Draft, chairman of Draft Worldwide. “If you come
up with the big idea, the big offer, that’s what drives business.”

OceanofPDF.com

Start fast — in the first sentence Even the most accomplished writers
struggle to get their first sentences right. E. B. White wasn’t
satisfied with his first draft of Charlotte’s Web, especially the
opening, and worked on it for more than a year. He tried leading off
with Wilbur the pig, Charlotte the spider, and Zuckerman’s barn before
deciding on this riveting first sentence:

“Where’s Papa going with that ax?” said Fern to her mother as they were
setting the table for breakfast.

Writers of direct mail don’t have a year to ponder and revise, but they
do take pains over their openings. Much direct mail is read over a
wastebasket

— you have to get to the point quickly. Here’s how one letter actually
started. Guess what this letter is selling (hard if not impossible) and
what’s likely to happen to it (easy).

Dear Friend:

I receive, as no doubt do you, a fair number of letters asking for
attention and not least for money. All, as I’ve often said, tell me at
undue length what I already know or do not need to know.

The wonderful computer errors of the Republican National Committee
apart, I try to read and respond as appropriate.

Nonetheless, I yearn for brevity. Not doubting that you share this
yearning, I will be brief.

Compare that to the opening of this letter, which ran for years and in
test after test beat all alternatives:

Quite frankly, the American Express Card is not for everyone. And not
everyone who applies for Cardmembership is approved.

OceanofPDF.com

What the pros do

Here are some other practices followed by direct mail professionals: 1.
Get people to open the envelope

Always say something on your envelope; it is what your prospects see
first. Tease them. Hint at your offer. Tell them about a gift inside —
or promise valuable information.

ADVANCE NOTICE

PLEASE OPEN AT ONCE: DATED MATERIALS INSIDE

WE HAVE A FREE GIFT FOR YOU

RECEIVE FOUR ISSUES FREE

7.8% INTEREST ON AND ON (Not an introductory offer) 2. Find the
audience, then the message

A sales letter is an advertisement delivered in the mail. Successful
advertising starts with a persuasive strategy; strategies start not with
what to say, but to whom — the target. It’s only human to try to appeal
to

everybody. A radio commercial began, “Hey there, men! And that includes
you girls.” Resist that temptation.

Try to form a realistic picture of your prospects — age and income,
lifestyle and attitudes, the products they use. Then determine the
single most important benefit your product or service offers. Most have
several benefits, but one must be more important to your prospects than
the others.

The essence of a successful strategy is sacrifice; play down lesser
benefits to concentrate on the one with the most sales power.

3. Favor long letters over short ones

Most amateurs assume people won’t read more than a page or two at most.
The fact is that long letters generally pull better than short ones — if
you:

Grab the reader’s attention at the beginning

Load the letter with relevant facts

Have an attractive offer

Look at the mailings you receive. How many are just one page, and how
many are several pages long — and include several pieces of literature?

One of the largest and most successful direct marketing companies,
Publishers Clearing House, sends a package that includes six enclosures
plus a letter almost a thousand words long. You are asking your readers
to make an investment — in time, money, or both — and must convince them
that what you’re selling is worth it.

4. Make it inviting to read

People won’t read letters that look formidable, with long blocks of
text.

Use visual devices — like this inset paragraph — to make your letter
look inviting and interesting, and easy to get through. Headings

(like “Make it inviting to read” above) and handwritten notes also work.

Think beyond standard envelopes and standard sizes of paper. The most
effective mail is often an unusual size, shape, or color. But keep in
mind that letters should look like letters, not like advertisements.
Coupons should look like coupons (or money), certificates like college
diplomas or high-grade bonds.

Coupons and certificates are conventions that readers understand at a
glance. Making them look like something else, to be different, defeats
their purpose.

5. Don’t let the reader off the hook

People procrastinate. You must create a reason for your prospect to act
now.

Danny Newman, America’s most successful seller of subscriptions to
concert and theatrical seasons, builds all his mailings from a single
injunction: SUBSCRIBE NOW.

The P.S. is one of the best-read parts of any letter. Use it to remind
the reader of some important detail, to restate your offer, to create a
sense of urgency with a deadline or a special premium. Amazon.com
introduced its new on-line auction service in a letter with this closing
note: P.S. We’ve worked hard for many months to bring you Amazon.com
Auctions and we’re super-proud of it. As an Amazon.com customer, you’re
pre-registered for both buying and selling. I think you’ll be surprised
how easy it is to use. For a short time, we’re also doing a promotion
where first-time buyers receive a $10 Amazon.com gift certificate.
Please come and give it a look at www.amazon.com — just click the
Auctions tab.

P.S. Even if the P.S. doesn’t affect results “that much,” a small effect
can be worthwhile. And the P.S. doesn’t add a penny to the cost of your
mailing.

What Works Best in Fund-Raising Letters In the world of political
fund-raising by mail, two acknowledged masters are Richard Viguerie and
Roger Craver, a conservative and a liberal. Craver disagrees with
Viguerie on every issue, observes the New York Times, “except on how to
write a letter.”

“You need a letter filled with ideas and passion,” says Craver. “It does
not beat around the bush, it is not academic, it is not objective. The
toughest thing is to get the envelope open. The next toughest thing is
to get the person to read the letter.”

A Craver letter for handgun control carried this message on the
envelope: ENCLOSED: Your first chance to tell the National Rifle
Association to go to hell!

The letter starts:

Dear Potential Handgun Victim

To raise money for charitable, educational, or political causes, you
must appeal to the emotions. People can have strong feelings about the
causes represented by a community fund, about a political candidate,
about a religious institution. They want to give. Yet those new to
fund-raising are often hesitant about asking for money.

People who have given previously are the best source of funds. Many
studies have shown that most first-year donors will renew in year two,
and an even larger percent of retained donors from year two will renew
each subsequent year. Often those donors will increase their gifts. They
may participate in deferred giving programs. They will even help acquire
new donors by working as volunteers.

These facts are at the heart of direct mail fund-raising. They lead to
two central conclusions:

It pays to invest to get new donors.

It pays to invest in building a relationship.

The stakes are clear. Nonprofit organizations depend increasingly on
private support for their survival, and direct mail is a crucial source
of funds for charitable institutions.

1. Say thanks, then please

Donors are believers, and believers give. You can go to them on a
regular schedule or in emergencies. Write to them regularly, and keep
them informed about the organization and its activities. Make them
members, not just givers. Send membership certificates and pins. Then,
when it comes time to renew their support, they need only an inexpensive
reminder to prompt their generosity and loyalty.

Here too, free gifts, even token ones, add to the effectiveness of your
mailing.

Write to say thanks. Thanks, and won’t you give again?

A successful fund-raising letter from the general director of the Lyric
Opera of Chicago began by thanking donors for all they had done for the
company the previous year. The first paragraph ended, “I just wanted to
be sure to say ‘Thanks’ before I say ‘Please.’”

2. Tell the prospect how much money you want

The reader does not know how much money you expect. Suggesting the size
of the contribution is up to you.

Upward Inc., an after-school program in New York, made this successful
appeal:

Here’s a holiday gift idea — how about giving a computer to a kid in
Harlem (for about $800)? Upward Inc. needs a few people like you to
rebuild its computer center in order to put inner city children on their
life path “upward.”

At the same time, you don’t want to discourage smaller gifts. The Upward
Inc. letter went on to suggest at least contributing something toward
the price of a computer monitor at $300.

It can be effective to tell readers what different services cost, so
they can select a giving level. Another letter from Lyric Opera gives
this approach a stylish twist in a note to Santa Claus:

Dear Santa:

It would be lovely if you could leave an $8 million check in my stocking
this year — but I know that’s a bit much to ask. So let me list some of
the things we really do need, that maybe you can help us with.

Children’s Backstage Tour ($7,500)

Senior Citizens’ Matinee ($15,000)

Airfare to bring artists from New York ($325 each) Ballet shoes ($75
each)

Wigs and make-up for the chorus of Mefistofele ($5,500) Leaves to
redecorate the tree in Elixir of Love ($550) Rental of keyboard for
sound effects ($3,607)

Youth Education programs ($15,000)

If I listed everything Lyric needs, or needs money to fund, this letter
would go on for pages — so I’ve selected only a few items that are
especially on my mind as the holidays approach.

3. Put your appeal in personal terms

People would rather give to other people than to faceless institutions.

Alan Reich founded and runs the National Organization on Disability from
his wheelchair. He writes to a friend:

The last time we were together, we spoke about a project of great
importance to people with disabilities. It is the addition of a statue
of

[]

President Roosevelt in his wheelchair at the FDR Memorial. Congress
passed legislation mandating that the statue be added. It also requires
that the $1.65 million be raised in the private sector, and N.O.D. has
taken on this challenge.

I am writing to request your help, because I regard you and FDR as
kindred spirits, at least in triumphing over disability.

Your letter should tell readers what’s going on, the work your
institution is doing, and why it is important. Tell them about the
things you can’t do —

unless they give. Don’t let them assume the drive will be successful
whether or not they give. This adds urgency to your appeal.

Unless we hear from you right away, we may be forced to close down two
Morgan Memorial buildings.

Westminster Abbey is falling down. If this doesn’t move you, read no
further.

Don’t forget to tell people how little you spend on administration.

Assure them that you mean it when you say no contribution is too small,
even a dollar.

Nobody likes a mailbox full of junk mail. However, one person’s junk is
another’s passion. Susan cannot get enough garden catalogs, George
enough cookbooks. Junk mail is mail that is inappropriate — because it
is talking to the wrong person, talking at the wrong time, or talking in
the wrong tone.

Direct mail was once “pretty intrusive,” acknowledges Howard Draft.

“But now we’re trying to understand what a customer’s needs are and how
to create an invitational approach.”

People read direct mail and they act on it — if the product or service
or cause is something they want or believe in, and if they trust the
mailer. The single most important thing you can do to send money through
the mail is to convince people that they can trust you.

Never exaggerate, either in word or picture, what you are offering, or
when you will deliver, or any other detail. If, for some unforeseen
reason,

you can’t live up to a promise, send a postcard saying so; apologize;
and say what you’re going to do about it. The trust you build will be
well worth the extra cost.

OceanofPDF.com

10 Coping with Political Correctness

“…I believe in courtesy, the ritual by which we avoid hurting other
people’s feelings by satisfying our egos.” So says Kenneth Clark in the
conclusion of his classic book Civilization, revealing himself “in my
true colors, as a stick-in-the-mud.”

A similar old-fashioned respect for the feelings of others has ballooned
into what is called, often scornfully, “political correctness” in speech
and writing. It is all too easy, however, to ridicule the politically
correct language police, ever on guard against any word or expression
that might possibly offend anybody anywhere. The suggestion, for
example, that All The King’s Men, deemed doubly sexist with “king” and
“men,” should be retroactively retitled All the Monarch’s People,
deserves the hoots and hollers it arouses. And a bit later we will
unload a few hoots and hollers ourselves.

Nonetheless we respect the underlying impulse of politically correct
writing and commend it to you. It arises from sensitivity to the
feelings of readers. You would be wise to be alert to the power of words
to distress and infuriate people, and to do your best not to wield that
power recklessly. As a country song puts it, “sticks and stones can
break my bones, but words can break my heart.”

Bernard Shaw defined a gentleman as somebody who “never insults a person
unintentionally.” In business writing we try to be gentlemen in just
that sense. We make a conscious effort not to insult people — nor
offend, nor upset them — unwittingly and by accident. It is good
business as well as good manners. Why rile up your customer or your
client or your prospect?

From time to time, for one reason or another, you may have reason to use
a word or an expression which you know will rub somebody wrong. When

you do so, you should be prepared to face the consequences with your
eyes wide open.

Sensitive — but not hypersensitive

Gender, race, ethnic origin, age, and sexual preference are where most
of the sensitivities reside. Our policy is to be sensitive but not
hypersensitive.

Minority groups often have strong feelings about the terms used to refer
to them, and their preferences can change over the years. “Negro” was
the polite term for decades. After it was replaced by “black” and
“African American,” Negro became a target of derision among black
comedians. If preferences should change again, so what? Use whatever
happens to be the current preference of the group in question — and take
the trouble to find out what that is. Minorities suffer enough without
being labeled with terms they regard as offensive, regardless of what
the writer may think of their preferences or their reasons.

You should not, however, feel obliged to scrutinize in depth every word
in your vocabulary for possible derogatory connotations. Some years ago
the Multicultural Management Program at the University of Missouri
School of Journalism published a checklist of words that journalists
should be wary of. The fifteen-page list contained over two hundred
entries, including:

Fried chicken

Burly

Buxom

Warpath

Gyp

Matronly

Dutch treat

Illegal alien

Shiftless

Elderly

Crippled

Feminine

Ghetto

Jocks

Commenting on this “bad word dictionary,” the late columnist Mike Royko
wrote that “the age of super-sensitivity is crushing me.” By the end of
his column, though, Royko had become uncrushed enough to assert that

“when I put together a softball team, I’ll recruit real jocks, not a
bunch of wimps, nerds, dweebs or weenies” and “I’ll continue to go have
Dutch-treat lunches with my friends and check the bill to make sure the
waiter didn’t gyp me.”

Perhaps the most remarkable entry on the list is “without rhythm,”

objectionable, the journalism school’s compilers explain, as “a
stereotype about whites. Implies that others have rhythm, also a
stereotype.”

In an editorial bemoaning the proliferation of offended groups, the Wall
Street Journal said: “Today, alas, we have created whole classes of the
perpetually aggrieved, built on the notion that if someone takes
offense, then an image or name is ipso facto offensive.”

What is one to make of the sad case of the aide to the mayor of
Washington, D.C., who lost his job because, discussing budget matters,
he used the word “niggardly”? He used it in its correct meaning —
miserly, stingy — which bears no connection, either in common usage or
lexicography, to the offensive term for African Americans that it
resembles.

Nonetheless he was misunderstood. He regarded his own failure to
anticipate the misunderstanding, and the distress it caused, as awful
enough to require him to resign. The mayor agreed, and accepted his
resignation.

Such an event brings into pointed opposition the standards of political
correctness and those of freedom of speech.

“Can speech ever be both correct and free?” asks the headline of a
recent article in the “Ethics Today” column of the Financial Times. “The
line we seek to draw is elusive,” writes the columnist, Joe Rogaly. We
should

“debar public use of language that foments antipathy towards others, but
…

should also allow everyone to speak his or her mind. It is one of those
things none of us will ever get quite right. When in doubt, I say favour
free speech.”

In principle we agree with Rogaly and come down on the side of free
speech. We admire writers, editors, and public figures who keep their
eye

on the first amendment to the U.S. Constitution, and we deplore the
preposterous fate of the literate bureaucrat who spoke rightly but not
freely with “niggardly.” In business writing, however, we would move
Rogaly’s

“elusive line” a few inches in the direction of what’s purely practical,
encouraging you to place a lot of emphasis on the probable consequences
of your choice of words. If you know that writing “niggardly” is likely
to be misunderstood and to cause anger or pain, what’s wrong with
writing

“stingy” instead?

In other chapters you will find lists of do’s and don’ts, firm opinions
on what’s good and what’s bad. In the matters under consideration here
no such specific guidance is desirable. Sensitivities vary from audience
to audience. An expression that ruffles feathers in one context will
breeze by uneventfully in another. Words that one person can safely
write may be anathema coming from somebody else. Just do your best to be
as considerate of the feelings of others in writing as you would be in
person.

That will take you a long way toward achieving the underlying purposes
of political correctness while avoiding its excesses.

He, she, and everybody

We do, however, have specific suggestions on how to handle one common
writing problem. That is the convention of male-oriented language used
in reference to all people — for example, “he” as a collective pronoun
referring to women as well as men. This convention is pretty much
obsolete, but what replaces it can be awkward or grating.

“He or she,” for example, as in “Every novelist hopes that he or she
will win the Pulitzer Prize,” is okay once in a while but becomes
tedious and self-conscious with repetition, and in some cases ludicrous
— e.g., give the devil his or her due. This problem is often poorly
solved by a reckless disregard for grammar: “Every novelist hopes that
they will win the Pulitzer Prize.” Some people, otherwise sticklers for
proper English, make an exception for this construction, arguing that
everybody has a right to their own priorities in solving problems of
political correctness. We say that everybody (always singular) has a
right to his priorities, or to her priorities, or to his or hers, but no
individual of either sex has a right to their

priorities. “Every novelist hopes they’ll win” grates on many ears as
badly as would “Every novelist hope he’ll win.”

Fortunately there is a simple way to be correct both grammatically and
politically. Just put the point into the plural: “All novelists hope
they will win the Pulitzer Prize.” Converting a subject from singular to
plural works nicely in most instances. Another trick of the trade is to
switch from the third person to the second person: instead of “when an
employee receives a message addressed to him or her,” write “when you
receive a message addressed to you.”

In this book we occasionally use “she” or “her” when we want the reader
to understand that we are referring to either a man or a woman, and in
other cases in similar constructions with a similar meaning we use the
conventional “he” or “him.” We believe that this scattershot method of
giving equal representation to women and men is clear to both and
offensive to neither.

An assumption, touched on earlier, lies under everything in this
chapter.

We assume that readers whom you’ve angered or offended are unlikely to
respond favorably to your message. Since much business writing, and
nearly all important business writing, seeks a favorable response, it
follows that you should try not to anger or offend your readers.

Self-interest aside, we return to Kenneth Clark and his belief in
courtesy as a mark of civilized behavior. We, too, believe in courtesy,
in writing as in life.

OceanofPDF.com

11 Writing a Resume — and Getting an

Interview

Nothing else you write can make so big a difference in your life as your
application for a job.

You should apply in writing. When you telephone for a job, you do it at
your convenience. You choose the moment to call, and the chances of your
potential employer being free to talk with you — or even interested in
doing so — are remote. If you want to be taken seriously, communicate in
writing.

What you write is a resume* and an accompanying letter. Some of these
will end up in a wastebasket, unread, but a well-written approach
usually earns a response. The point is to secure an interview, and that
objective should guide your thinking.

The resume is a crucial part of the process. But it won’t get you a job.

Companies don’t hire resumes, they hire people — and they make those
decisions in an interview. So why is your resume so important? A good
resume — one that’s relevant, clear, and concise — is a lot more likely
to lead to an interview than a poor one. This is true whether your
resume arrives in the mail or over the Internet.

A good resume also helps you prepare for a better interview. Many job
applicants walk into an interview without having organized their
thoughts about the kind of job they want or why they’re qualified. When
people do come to an interview prepared to make a cohesive case for
themselves, they stand out sharply. Think of a resume as a script that
organizes your thinking, so when you’re asked a question you don’t find
yourself stumbling around looking for the right response.

Before you write anything down, think about what you have to offer and
how those skills and experiences can be presented in terms of what the
job requires. Start by doing some research on the market (and yourself).

What kinds of skills and experiences are required?

What can you say that demonstrates that you have made some effort to
learn about the company or organization?

What can you tell them about the contribution you’re qualified to make?

Research can also mean finding a person to help get you in the door.

The executive recruitment firm Russell Reynolds estimates that 70
percent of jobs are landed through personal contacts.

Dear Charlie:

Attached is the resume of someone I think you should meet.

A resume is frequently the first detailed information about you that a
potential employer will receive. It is the first impression of you. Not
the final impression — that is you.

What’s Important in a Resume

A resume summarizes the facts about you, your education, and your
experience that are relevant to the job you want. But the most important
point is that it positions you in the mind of the reader or interviewer.

OceanofPDF.com

Summarize what you have to offer (or what you want) The single most
important section is a heading that summarizes what you have to offer a
prospective employer in terms of experience, skills, results or
interests, or your job objective. Don’t be a pessimist and conclude
right away that you don’t have the qualifications. Most people have more
than they realize, but an amazing number either can’t pull them together
in coherent form or are too lazy to think about how they relate to the
person receiving the application.

Put the summary at the head of your resume, in boldface type.

14 years of marketing experience, proven ability in building brands

Information technology officer with track record in Business Process
Reengineering

OceanofPDF.com

Objective — management training position in retailing Think about this
summary more than anything else that follows. Work on it, distill it.

Make it as easy as possible for a potential employer to decide whether
you might be a candidate for the job at hand — and whether it is
worthwhile to go to the next step and invite you to an interview.
Remember: The purpose is an interview, not a place in a file drawer.

OceanofPDF.com

Keep it simple

Stick to standard, conventional forms. A prospective employer,
confronted by a pile of applications, will not be charmed by those that
must be figured out like a puzzle.

No fancy formats or pop-ups. A standard 8 ½ by 11-inch page, designed to
go in a standard Number 10 business envelope, and a standard file
folder, easy to find for further reference, is the only professional
style. Make it neat and not fussy. Avoid lots of italics and boldface,
special typefaces, colored paper. Resumes on videotape are seldom
acceptable except in companies where show biz is in style.

A resume should be straightforward, logical — and truthful. Make it easy
for the reader to understand you and to track your career. And write it
yourself. No professional consultant knows you as well as you do, nor
cares as much about getting you a job.

Keep it short. Try to get your resume on one page, two at the most. If
you have little experience, padding won’t help. If you have decades, all
the more impressive to stick to highlights. Don’t forget that there will
be a cover letter — and an interview — in which you can elaborate on any
points you want to stress.

What to Put In — What to Leave Out

Leave out the small stuff and the old stuff, so you can fully make the
points that are important. You don’t have to put everything in a resume;
keep back something for the interview. Leave out those high school
awards, the college fraternity social chairman, the minor achievements.
Leave out

“References available on request” — if we want them, we’ll ask for them.

Put in everything that points to why you would be good at the job.

Make sure you have described your accomplishments in terms of the
result, not the activity. It is important for your reader to know how
far you

moved the rock, not how much time you spent pushing it.

There’s no one perfect style for everybody. The resume represents you,
and you’re not like everybody else. One useful format is to divide it
into two parts — a tight chronology of your jobs and responsibilities,
followed by a page highlighting your significant achievements.

Start by putting in everything; then boil it down to a page or so by
cutting the marginal points or those that barely apply. If they don’t
directly make the case for your candidacy, take them out or cut them
down. Stick to the facts, and be specific.

People put the strangest things in their resumes. The test of what to
include is the same as it is for anything else you write: Is it
relevant? Is it true?

Here are some other basics:

OceanofPDF.com

What to put in

First things first. Name, address, phone number at the top.

Also fax and e-mail.

State a job objective — factually, without embellishment. A prospective
employer doesn’t care if you want a “challenging position.” (Sometimes
we think we would hire, sight unseen, anybody who would be willing to
get out all that nonchallenging work every day.)

Some people are qualified to pursue alternative careers — in either law
or finance, for example. If that’s you, prepare two different resumes —
one for each objective, with the balance of the resume tailored to that
objective.

List jobs, including locations and dates — starting with the most
recent.

An employer is more interested in what you have been doing lately than
in what you did ten years ago. If you gained your most relevant
experience some years ago on an earlier job, make it stand out by the
amount of detail in the resume — not by changing the order.

If you’ve been out of work at some point in your career, or worked for
companies that no longer exist, you may be tempted to omit those
experiences. Resist the temptation. Fill in all the gaps; otherwise, it
looks as though you’re hiding something. For the period you’ve been out
of work, simply say something like

“1997-99 Personal Projects,” or whatever happens to be the truth.

Include some definition of the size of the business you worked in, such
as sales, unless the size will be obvious to all readers. Describe the
scope of your responsibilities and, most important, your
accomplishments. Be honest; if you were part of a team, say so. Don’t
exaggerate.

Include all college or graduate degrees and dates. Leave out high school
(unless you’re applying for a first job or attended an unusual school).

List any boards of directors you serve on, professional or trade
associations, or significant community or volunteer service
organizations, with the most important ones first.

List any published articles or books.

If you are fresh out of college or graduate school, extracurricular
activities can be relevant.

Briefly cover significant personal facts. Briefly. List all special
skills, such as technology skills or facility in a foreign language. The
nature and degree of your computer savvy can be important in many jobs
nowadays. You never know when such secondary abilities will be the
deciding factor in getting you an interview, or even a job.

OceanofPDF.com

What to leave out

Age or gender — not essential, seldom relevant, and the law says you
cannot be asked. But, of course, prospective employers will figure out
whether you’re male or female, and will get a pretty good idea of your
age from the dates on your resume.

Honors or prizes — unless they are genuinely important in your field.

Height and weight — unless it is relevant to the requirements of the
job.

Travel — unless relevant.

Salary requirement — if appropriate, put this in the cover letter.

Hobbies — who cares?

Race or religion — best left out. The law says you cannot be asked.

Clubs — not necessary.

Photograph — only beginners seem to include their pictures.

Make it perfect — make it professional. No typos. No misspellings. A
small typo will detract from an otherwise stellar resume. It comes off
as unprofessional and careless, and sends the wrong signals. You don’t
have to go to the expense of printing your resume, but get top-quality
reproduction (laser or high-quality inkjet prints). Crisp and black,
without smudges.

Be careful with abbreviations; people may not know what they mean.

Give the full names of companies, trade associations, governmental
bodies.

Take out all unnecessary words. Shorten everything to the extent of
writing in telegraphic style — without verbs, articles, or connectives.
Write in the third person: “Managed sixty-four-person department,” not
“I managed …”

Then show it to someone who will bring a fresh perspective and who knows
you well enough to ask “Is this really what you wanted to say?” “Is

this relevant?” or “So what?”

The Letter That Gets Your Resume Read

Never send a resume without a covering letter. It takes time to go
through a resume. Employers decide from your covering letter whether
your resume is worth that time — and might ultimately lead to an
interview.

Your letter is your opportunity to focus on the chief attributes you
want to fix in your reader’s mind. It’s worth putting thought into what
you say in your letter, and taking care with how you say it.

Here are some points to keep in mind:

1. Think about the reader

What can you offer that will benefit the prospective employer? Do you
have relevant experience, training, or education?

Consulting with a young law student, we were struck by his draft letter
applying for a job in the Environmental Protection Agency. Almost every
paragraph started with “I,” as it outlined his impressive credentials. A
better letter — starting with the needs of the reader rather than the
virtues of the writer — began by stating:

According to press reports, your agency is under enormous pressure in
staff and budgets, and it is obvious that you must have people who can
move fast and carry a heavy load. Here are several reasons why my
background should be helpful to EPA in exactly those ways.

Try to single out a benefit to the organization that will accrue from
your joining it.

2. Identify the sort of job you’re looking for

State it clearly and at once. Say what led you to apply — a want ad, a
recommendation from a friend, the reputation of the firm.

A letter applying for a job as a research analyst started in this
mysterious way:

Dear Mr. Ball:

It’s spring already — a time to think about planting seeds.

Some seeds are small, like apple seeds. Others are bigger.

Coconuts, for example. But big or little, a seed can grow or flourish if
it’s planted in proper soil.

The applicant would have done better to start like this: Dear Mr. Ball:

I understand that you are looking for a research analyst.

Better straight to the point, however trite, than roundabout, however
ingenious. Mr. Ball wants to know what the letter is about; he doesn’t
have time to play guessing games.

Here’s a direct approach that led to a job:

This letter is in response to a recent conversation with Mary Brown, in
which Mary suggested that my background in continuous process
improvement might be a good fit with your current needs.

In my current position as Consulting Quality Leader/Master Black Belt at
General Equipment Systems, I am responsible for using my process
improvement and team facilitation skills to support a wide variety of
quality projects.

Don’t emulate the fellow who had his tonsils removed through his belly
button, just to be different.

Pique the interest of the reader

You can often get to the point in a way that adds an extra element of
interest.

According to the grapevine, you’ve been looking for an experienced
research analyst for three months. If so, then it’s strange that in such
a small community we didn’t know each other until now.

That is not the same as trying to attract favorable attention by
buttering up a potential employer, which doesn’t work:

I have long admired your firm as one of the most reputable and
professional in the country. It is clear that your success cannot be
attributed to accident or coincidence.

Flattery may still have its uses in business, but introducing yourself
as a flatterer won’t impress most employers.

Here are two openings that go straight to the point in interesting ways:
Dear Ms. Page:

Do you need an exceptionally fast accountant? If so, I may be your man.

Dear Mr. Kilgour:

Our mutual friend Charles Hartigan has urged me to write to you about
your plan to create a publicity department. I would like to help you set
it up — and I know how to do it, as you can see from my resume.

4. Address an individual, never a title by itself Don’t address your
envelope Attention — Personnel Director, or Manager or Head of
Accounting Department.

We threw out applications addressed only to Creative Director or
Chairman on the ground that if the writer were too lazy to find out a

person’s name, he or she would be too lazy to do a good job.

Spell all names right. It is astonishing how often job applicants
misspell names, including the names of the firms they want to work for.
A message comes through even before the letter is read: “This applicant
can’t be seriously interested in working here.”

Check and double check all names, even those you think you know. Are you
sure it’s “Field” and not “Fields”? How many “f’s” are there in

“Hefner”? Does Eliot spell his name with one “l” or two, one “t” or two?
Is it “Ann” or “Anne”? “Proctor” or “Procter”?

5. Be specific and factual

Once you’ve made clear what job you want, then touch on your chief
qualification. Avoid egotistical abstractions such as: Ambition mixed
with striving for excellence is one of my strongest assets.

Ask yourself how you would feel saying that to a prospective employer.

If it would embarrass you in person, don’t put it in writing.

So how do you indicate personal characteristics that may be among your
most important qualifications? Be specific. Offer evidence in support of
any claim of ability, and put the evidence factually.

My experience includes such activities as: Utilizing continuous process
improvement methodologies and quality tools in the redesign of company
processes to reduce defect conditions and increase profitability

Working closely with departments to identify opportunities for process
improvements

Coaching/mentoring teams in the use of quality tools such as Pareto
charts, Fishbone diagrams, Scatter diagrams, Regression analysis,
Designed Experiments, and others

Establishing control charts to help business leaders accurately assess
both the stability of their processes and the ability of these processes
to meet customer requirements Designing a process management system that
will allow the business leaders to understand and manage their
respective departments as a series of interrelated processes Additional
details are included in the accompanying resume.

Touch on your most important accomplishments in the same matter-of-fact
style. Cover your pertinent responsibilities. Never brag, but don’t
hesitate to cite authentic evidence of your value. If you don’t blow
your own horn, who will?

6. Be personal, direct, and natural

You are a human being writing to another human being. Neither of you is
an institution. Be businesslike and courteous, but not stiff and
impersonal.

The more your letter sounds like you, the more it will stand apart from
the letters of your competitors. But don’t try to dazzle the reader with
your sparkling personality. You wouldn’t show off in an interview, so
why show off in a letter? If you make each sentence sound the way you
would say it across a desk, there will be plenty of personality in your
letter.

Most good covering letters make their point in about a half page; few
run longer than a page. If your cover letter looks more formidable than
your resume, you have defeated your purpose.

Keep it short.

7. Propose a specific next step

You will be writing to a person or to a box number. In either case,
close the letter with a clear and precise statement of how you wish to
proceed

toward an interview — remember that’s your objective, not a “We’ll keep
your letter on file” response.

Avoid such mumblings as:

Hoping to hear from you soon.

Thank you for your time and consideration.

I’m looking forward to the opportunity of discussing a position with
you.

All such conclusions place the burden of the next step on your busy
prospective employer. Why make someone else work on your behalf? Do the
job yourself.

I’ll call your office Wednesday afternoon to see if you’d like me to
come in for an interview.

I’m free for an interview every morning until eight forty-five and
Thursdays after two-thirty. I’ll call your office Tuesday afternoon to
find out if you’d like to get together at any of these times.

At this stage you should volunteer to telephone. A phone call now makes
things easy for the person at the other end. If you don’t call, then
someone has to go to the trouble of calling or writing you.

Or you could end your letter like this:

If you’d like me to come in for an interview, you can reach me at (999)
438-6688, extension 276, from 10 A.M. to 1 P.M, and from 2 P.M. to 6:30
P.M. on working days. I can arrange to get away for a couple of hours
any day but Monday; best for me would be Thursday morning.

The idea is to make it as simple as you possibly can for your
prospective employer to set up a mutually convenient appointment.

8. Send different letters to different readers

With the exception of the cases noted in our earlier discussion of the
resume, you will probably want to send the same resume to all potential
employers. But you may not want to approach all of them exactly the same
way in your covering letter.

Certain of your qualifications may be more important to one employer
than to another. Take the trouble to tailor your letter for each of
them.

Send lots of letters. Finding the right job in the shortest time is in
part a numbers game. Send your letter and resume to as many different
people in an organization as you can; it is impossible to predict where
the opportunities lie. And mail to lots of companies. The more people
who see your resume, the greater the odds that one of them will have an
open job and invite you to come in for an interview.

Send a second letter if you haven’t had a response after a few weeks.
It’s possible that the addressee was traveling, that your application
was mistakenly screened out and never seen, that it was forgotten, or
that a job has opened up that wasn’t there when you first wrote.

9. Follow up an interview in writing

You will stand out from most other candidates by the simple act of
sending a follow-up note confirming your interest and expressing
appreciation for the interview. So few people do it that it will put you
high on the interviewer’s list, at least in terms of interest and
courtesy.

Try to find something specific to comment on, something beyond a
perfunctory “thank you.”

Dear Ms. Oldham:

After I left your office, I realized that we’d talked for more than an
hour. It was stimulating — and made the job seem most attractive.

You mentioned your need for someone who truly understands the consumer.
I hope you’ll keep in mind that I spent three years selling stoves
door-to-door plus five years in a research firm. I figure that I’ve

spent five thousand hours talking person-to-person with some three
thousand consumers in twenty states.

Whatever you say, don’t gush or grovel. Don’t exaggerate your
appreciation for the interview or your interest in the job. Here, as in
everything you write, candor and sincerity will serve you best.

If you don’t get the job, don’t give up — especially when you feel
you’ve made a favorable impression. Find ways to stay in touch with
anybody who already thinks well of you. A letter from time to time can
make sure you come to mind in case a suitable job opens up, or in case
your interviewer hears of one in another company. You might fire off an
occasional clipping on some subject of mutual interest, accompanied by a
brief note. You could report on some activity that’s new since the
interview and bears on the line of work you’re looking for. Or you can
simply reaffirm your interest.

If nothing works, maybe what you need is more relevant training or other
experience. A sign in a college placement office said: YOUR RESUME IS
FINE

(Change Your Life!)

When Michael Capellas was elected CEO of Compaq, he noted that he had
never written a resume in his career. The best way to get a better job
is to do a great job where you are.

OceanofPDF.com

THE E-RESUME

“Digital resumes, digital employment advertising, digital resume
searches — it’s a rebuilding of the infrastructure,” says Intel Chairman
Andy Grove.

No resumes were mailed by Jason Spero, who got his interview at
RealNames in California by distributing his resume via Web site,
targeted e-mail, and listing on the school’s on-line resume directory
service.

After an initial meeting, it was all e-mail correspondence leading to a
job. “An e-mail is less threatening than a phone call,” says Spero.

“The person is not feeling like, ‘Oh, God, he is going to keep calling
me, and I don’t have caller ID.’ I was never more threatening than a
line item on a computer.”

Nearly half the Global 500 companies are actively recruiting on the Net,
reports Fortune. At least 28,500 job boards list opportunities.

Software programs write your resume and provide interview coaching.

Compaq receives 85 percent of its resumes electronically. And it’s not
all techies — two thirds of on-line job seekers come from nontechnical
professions, says an industry newsletter.

“One of the big equalizers of the Internet is that it has allowed small
companies to have exposure,” says another successful job seeker. “In the
old world, you would never even see these companies. I never would have
been able to hook up with a startup like this, and it’s such a perfect
fit.”

While it’s still early days for this new recruiting medium, it’s not too
early to take note of its implications for electronic resumes. They must
be easily read and scanned for key words. Optical scanners catalog,
sort, store, and access resumes, and search for specifics — names of
software programs the applicant has mastered, for example, not
generalities like “familiar with all relevant software programs.”

Electronic searches work best with plain vanilla text and no boldface,
italics, underlines, or fancy type fonts (use Ariel or Times Roman).

Avoid bullets, dashes, or similar nonletter, non-numeric symbols —

they confuse scanners.

It is especially important to have a clear objective. “You only have
half a screen to impress a recruiter,” notes a job-search expert. “They
don’t want to scroll down to find out what you want to do.”

OceanofPDF.com

The resume on the following page, with e-mail

follow-up, helped land an e-job.

The objective was a job in the on-line world, so this resume
appropriately lists URL and e-mail addresses (plus phone number and mail
address).

The resume tells an impressive story and tells it clearly.

It starts with the most recent experience, business school, citing both
academic and leadership achievements.

It shows two impressive summer jobs, describing accomplishments as well
as activities.

It shows purpose — choosing a technology brand name (Microsoft) for a
job, then leaving the Internet world to go to business school, before
returning to a software company.

There’s just enough personal information to show the candidate has broad
interests.

And it does it on one page.

We might have preferred to start with a heading of relevant experience

or

objectives

(OBJECTIVE:

PRODUCT

MANAGEMENT POSITION WITH AN INTERNET COMPANY), but our advice is
general, not a formula — and this one worked.

JASON SPERO

[address, telephone, e-mail, URL]

EDUCATION

1997-present

J. L. KELLOGG GRADUATE SCHOOL OF MANAGEMENT

NORTHWESTERN UNIVERSITY Evanston, Ill

Candidate for Master of Management Degree, June 1999, Dean’s List

Majors in management and strategy,

entrepreneurship and marketing

Chair of High Tech Club (200 members,

$15,000 annual budget)

Chair of Soccer Club (100 members,

$10,000 annual budget)

1990-1994

AMHERST COLLEGE Amherst, Mass.

Bachelor of Arts in political science, May 1994 [List of undergraduate
sports activities and awards]

EXPERIENCE

1998

MICROSOFT CORPORATION Redmond, Wash.

Product Manager Intern, Windows NT Server 5.0 Group Built independent
software vendor (ISV)

Partners Program for Windows NT Server 5.0.

[List of specific program elements]

Developed long term marketing plan for

ISV strategic partnerships for Windows NT

launch.

Authored and managed primary market

research campaign for use in developing

positioning strategies for Windows NT 5.0

launch.

DONALDSON, LUFKIN & JENRETTE, INC. New York, N.Y.

1997

Associate, Investment Banking Division

[List of responsibilities and accomplishments]

1994-1997

Analyst, Investment Banking Division

[List of responsibilities and accomplishments]

PERSONAL

Alumni Fund-raising Agent for Amherst Class of 1994.

Youth soccer coach.

Enjoy travel, black Labradors, wine, basketball, soccer and scuba.

Traveled extensively in Spain and Italy. Learning

harmonica.

* Resume can also be résume (one accent) or résumé (two accents),
depending on which dictionary you consult. Since the accent keys in word
processing programs can be a nuisance to activate (and few typewriters
have such keys), resume is common usage in business correspondence.

OceanofPDF.com

12 Editing Yourself

Never send out the first draft of anything important. Good writers
consider editing an essential part of the writing process, not just a
final perfectionist polishing. The great songwriter Jerome Kern
struggled to perfect his wonderfully smooth melodies; his collaborator
Oscar Hammerstein II described the process: “Smoothness is achieved only
by scraping off roughness. None of his melodies was born smooth.”

Nothing you write will be born smooth either. Edit to scrape off
roughness. Edit to:

Shorten

Sharpen and clarify

Simplify

Check for accuracy and precision

Improve order and logic

Make sure nothing is left out

Review tone

Improve appearance

Examine everything from the reader’s point of view The first rule: If it
isn’t essential, cut it out. Go through your draft once asking only this
question: What can I get rid of? Cut unnecessary words, phrases,
sentences, paragraphs. Mark Twain said that writers should strike out
every third word on principle: “You have no idea what vigor it adds to
style.”

Twain’s advice works especially well in e-mail — your message pops.

Before you hit Send, try Delete.

The first time we wrote the above paragraph — before editing, it was
more than twice as long (and not as communicative).

Go through your draft a second time with these questions in mind: 1. Are
you mumbling?

In putting together a rough draft, it speeds things up to get something
down, even if it only approximates what you want to say. But never
settle for a rough approximation in your final draft. Have you chosen
the verbs and adjectives that express your meaning precisely? Could you
be less abstract and more down-to-earth? Scrutinize every important
thought.

2. Have you got things in the best order?

This point originally came later in the chapter. In editing, we decided
it was second in importance — and closely related to the point that
follows.

Good writers shift things around a lot. This used to be a laborious
business calling for scissors and Scotch tape and a lot of patience.
With Cut and Paste in word processing you can take your work apart and
reassemble it in seconds.

Many good writers print out a hard copy of each draft, to make it easy
to compare a revised version against an earlier one. It is not unusual
to decide that some of your shifts of order aren’t improvements after
all.

3. Are there any holes in your argument?

Put yourself in your reader’s shoes. Does everything follow logically?

Don’t expect your reader to leap from point to point like a goat on a
rocky hillside. Make sure your trail is clear, smooth, and well marked.

4. Are your facts right?

Check all statistics and statements of fact. A single bad error can
undermine your reader’s confidence in your paper. In particular, check
quotations. “I quote a lot,” says an erudite author. “I always check,
even when I am in no doubt. And I am always wrong.”

5. Is the tone right?

Too stiff? Too chummy? Lacking in sympathy? Rude? Again put yourself in
your reader’s place and change anything you, as a reader, might find
offensive.

From First Draft to Second: An Example

Here are five instances, taken from a single paper, of how editing
shortened, sharpened, and clarified what the writer was trying to say:
First draft

Scond draft

Consumer perception of the brand changed

The opinion of consumers

very positively.

improved.

Generate promotion interest through high

Advertise heavily to build

levels of advertising spending.

interest in promotions.

Move from product advertising to an

Move from product

educational campaign, one that would instruct advertising to an viewers
on such things as …

educational campaign on

subjects like …

Using the resources of our organization in

Our offices in Europe and

Europe, in addition to our Chicago office, we

Chicago produced

have been able to provide management with

alternatives that

alternatives they had previously been unaware management hadn’t known
of.

about.

Based on their small budget, we have

We developed a media

developed a media plan which is based on

plan that increases the

efficiency in reaching the target audience.

efficiency of their small

budget by focusing on

prospects.

Two Simple Editing Tips

No matter how good an editor you are already, you will become better if
you follow these two practices:

Let time elapse between drafts.

Solicit the opinion of other people.

Print a clean copy of your draft. Set it aside. Get away from it at
least overnight. Then come back to it in the morning. You’ll see it with
new eyes.

Imperfections that were invisible the day before will now pop out at
you.

Through some alchemy of time, you’ll know what to do about them.

When you ask for comments from other people — colleagues, friends,
anybody whose opinion you respect — you’re putting them to work for you.
If somebody’s suggestions are helpful, say “Thank you” and use them.

If you disagree with them, say “Thank you” and don’t use them. No need
to argue or prove your consultant wrong. It’s your work and you are
making the decisions. You’ll find that nearly everybody will spot
something you overlooked. It can be valuable just to discover a single
point that isn’t clear.

The late David Ogilvy sent drafts of all important papers to several of
his associates with the handwritten injunction: Please Improve. He was
the beneficiary of so many improvements that he lived his last
twenty-five years in a sixty-room castle in France.

Editing improved nearly every page of the book you’re reading: 9/20/99

Chapter 5

E-MAIL - THE GREAT MAILBOX IN THE SKY

There was Santa on the stage of New York’s Radio City Music Hall,
reading Christmas letters and without making anything special of it,
telling thousands of kids and grownups they can reach him at Santa.com.
And nobody blinked! We’ve moved from Baby Boomers to Generation X to
generation.com.

There’s a larger gap between snail mail and e-mail, and it’s growing
fast The U.S. Post Office counts its mail in hundreds of billions;
e-messages are counted in trillions, and almost doubling each year.

E-mail does things that letters or phone calls cannot do as well, or
cannot do at all. It is easy, fast, simple - and cheap. It’s perfect for
quick answers, confirming plans and short messages. It saves money on
phone calls, messengers and airfreight bills.

With e-mail, phone tag goes away. As do -time zones, Send at your
convenience, the receiver picks up at his or hers And If you do connect
on the phone, you are likely to be interrupting whatever the other
person is doing, even if it’s just thinking. By contrast, e-mail is
civilized.

E-mail helps organizations stay connected and react quickly.

All interoffice communications should flow over e-mail, preaches Bill
Gates, “so workers can act on news with reflex-like speed.” He goes on
to direct that meetings should not be used to present information: “It’s
more effective to use e-mail”.

A generation.com type also cites the benefit of a permanent address:
“Physical residence for people my generation changes constantly, but my
e-mail address will stay with me forever so people will always be able
to communicate with me.”

E mail is easy. Too easy sometimes. Its emphasis on speed takes away
from matters that deserve thought and reflection.

There are times when nothing beats conversation to solve a

problem, or when courtesy calls for a nicely typed or handwritten
letter.

Warning e-mail can be addictive and create problems of its own.
Newcomers on-line are so giddy with their discovery they want to
broadcast it to everyone. Garrulous bores find a large unwilling
audience. Managers with a natural tendency to hide barricade themselves
behind walls of e-mail, sending notes to people four desks away. More

OceanofPDF.com

13 Making It Easy to Read

If what you’ve written looks formidable or messy, your reader braces for
an ordeal before reading a word. “This will be heavy going” is the
message you deliver, in a glance.

If what you’ve written looks easy to take in and get through, you’re off
to a good start. That was always true with printed documents, now even
more so with e-mail. When a message runs more than a few lines,
formatting becomes an issue. Full-screen paragraphs are almost
impossible to read and show little consideration of the reader (as well
as lack of organized thinking by the sender).

Most word processing programs allow you to preview the appearance of
entire pages. This gives you a better sense of how your document looks
than partial pages on a screen, and can help you decide what
improvements may be called for. And the word processor’s virtuosity in
formatting makes it easy to put those improvements into effect.

Here are some ways to make everything you write look professional —

inviting to read, easy to understand, and simple to refer to.

1. Start with a heading

Put it top center in capital letters. This orients your reader at once.

OFFICE CLOSES FRIDAY NOON WE WON THE BUSINESS

2. Keep paragraphs short

Wherever you see a long paragraph, break it into two or more short ones.
This is particularly helpful with e-mail.

3. Use typographic devices for clarity and emphasis Most readable
magazines and newspapers prefer italics to underlining for emphasis.

To stress key ideas, put them into indented paragraphs. This emphasizes
them by setting them apart. Italics can add even greater emphasis.

When you do use underlining — in headings, for instance, or lead-ins —

use a single continuous underline rather than a choppy-looking
underline, one word at a time, which slows reading.

While color and special fonts on your PC add emphasis, they don’t come
across as businesslike in documents. A judicious use of color can be
effective in decks and other visual presentations (if not overdone).

4. Numbered, lettered, or bulleted points help your reader follow your
thinking

These devices look best a couple of spaces to the left of the text
margin, like the a. and b. that follow.

1.

Word processors put tools into your hands that used to be available only
to printers. Boldface type, for example, can make it easy for your
reader to scan your main points. (We use it for that purpose throughout
this book.)

2.

“Hanging” your letters and numbers in the margin makes your divisions
and subdivisions easier to follow.

5. Use uppercase and lowercase.

All-capital words and phrases should be used with restraint, except for
headings. Printing text in all capitals, characterized in the e-world as
SHOUTING, works against readership. There is a place for their sparing,
occasional use — for a blast of emphasis, as Bill Gates used them in a
note to his colleagues at Microsoft:

“I am hard-core about NOT supporting” [the latest version of Java from
Sun Microsystems.]

6. Break up large masses of type

Use subheads, like the numbered points throughout this book. Type them
in capitals and lowercase, underline them or put them in boldface, and
leave plenty of space above and below.

It often helps to send long e-mail messages as attachments. If that’s
the case, say so immediately: “Here’s an attachment.” And make the
attachment easy to transmit and easy to read. It’s irritating to receive
presentations via e-mail with wild colors for text and background.
They’re hard to read, sometimes impossible, and take forever to
download.

7. Use space to separate paragraphs

It looks neater than indents.

Use single spacing between lines, double spacing between paragraphs.

Drafts of documents for which you are soliciting comments should be

[]

triple-spaced throughout, with extrawide margins. It makes editing
easier.

8. Handle numbers consistently

Newspapers generally spell out numbers ten and under, and use numerals
for 11 and up. Book publishers follow other rules. Whatever you do, be
consistent.

It is easier to grasp big numbers when you write $60 million rather than
$60,000,000.

9. Make charts easy to handle — and interesting If your document
includes wide charts, don’t make the reader turn it sideways to read
them. Use horizontal foldouts.

Consider whether your charts need to be in the body of your document at
all. Might they go at the end, as appendixes? Your document will look
less formidable if it is uninterrupted by graphs and charts. If you do
use charts, color adds variety and interest.

Number your appendices and separate them clearly with tabs. This makes
them easy to find.

10. Number your pages, even in early drafts

If inserted material messes up the numerical order, use 1A, 1B (in
handwriting, if necessary), and so on. Nothing is more annoying than
trying to find a particular passage in an unnumbered document.

Before printing your final draft, run your eye over it with these
techniques in mind. What can you do to make it look more interesting?

Where will your meaning be illuminated by subheadings, italics,
boldface, indents, underlines, enumeration? Write for the eye as well as
the mind.

Legalese — and Hard to Penetrate

(We didn’t make this up. This is precisely how it came.) RESOLVED, that
this Committee hereby: (1) approves (a) the compensation for the
Officers of the Corporation for its fiscal year 2000; (b) the total
award for the fiscal year 1999

performance under the Corporation’s Annual Performance Plan (the “APP”);
(c) (i) the grants of Nonqualified Stock Options and Restricted Shares
under the Corporation’s Long-Term Incentive Plan (the “LTIP”), and (ii)
the grants of the Corporation’s Common Shares and the corresponding
payments of “gross-up”

compensation to account for the tax on such grants, all the foregoing
grants and payments to be effective as of the next Valuation Date and at
the Fair Market Value determined as of such Valuation Date, all such
terms as defined in the LTIP; and (d) the revision beginning with fiscal
year 2000 of the Performance Factors and Bonus Factors in Attachment 1
to the APP; (2) recommends to the Board of Directors the compensation
and grants of Nonqualified Stock Options for the Corporation’s Chief
Executive Officer, all of the actions referenced in clauses (1) and (2)
above as shown in Exhibits 1 to 6 presented to and filed with the
minutes of this meeting; and (3) authorizes the Corporation’s Executive
Committee to make, with respect to participants in the APP who are not
Officers of the Corporation, any further awards or adjustments in awards
under the APP, provided that the sum of all such awards and the
individual awards approved in accordance herewith do not exceed the
total award approved herein.

Still Legalese — but Possible to Grasp the Gist of It (Not a word
changed)

RESOLVED, that this Committee hereby:

Approves

1.

The compensation for the Officers of the Corporation for its fiscal year
2000;

2.

The total award for the fiscal year 1999 performance under the
Corporation’s Annual Performance Plan (the “APP”); 3.

The grants of Nonqualified Stock Options and Restricted Shares under the
Corporation’s Long-Term Incentive Plan (the

“LTIP”) and the grants of the Corporation’s Common Shares and the
corresponding payments of “gross-up” compensation to account for the tax
on such grants, all the foregoing grants and payments to be effective as
of the next Valuation Date and at the Fair Market Value determined as of
such Valuation Date, all such terms as defined in the LTIP; and

4.

The revision beginning with fiscal year 2000 of the Performance Factors
and Bonus Factors in Attachment 1 to the APP;

Recommends to the Board of Directors:

1.

The compensation and grants of Nonqualified Stock Options for the
Corporation’s Chief Executive Officer,

2.

All of the actions referenced in clauses (1) and (2) above as shown in
Exhibits 1 to 6 presented to and filed with the minutes of this meeting;
and

Authorizes the Corporation’s Executive Committee to make, with respect
to participants in the APP who are not Officers of the Corporation, any
further awards or adjustments in awards under the APP, provided that the
sum of all such awards and the individual

awards approved in accordance herewith do not exceed the total award
approved herein.

OceanofPDF.com

Other Books That Will Help You Write Better

Most people who write well read a lot. They read many kinds of good
writing, past and current. Good fiction, good essays, good history, good
journalism. Reading gets the shapes and rhythms of good writing into
your head.

The best of today’s newspaper columnists — among them Thomas Friedman,
Maureen Dowd, and George Will — serve up regular examples of how to
express a point of view persuasively in limited space. In addition to
syndicated columnists, you’ll find a variety of good writing every day
on the Op Ed pages of major newspapers. Most of it is written by people
who, like you, don’t write for a living. They have learned to put
forward their ideas clearly and forcefully in writing that meets the
standards of the top editors.

Reading good writing will help you more than reading about good writing,
and it’s a lot more fun. There are, however, dozens of books that have
helped people become better writers. Here are a few we’ve found
especially useful. Some are out of print, and you may have to chase them
down by using an on-line book service.

The Elements of Style (Allyn & Bacon), William Strunk Jr. and E.

B. White. The new Fourth Edition of this compact classic has a foreword
by Roger Angell (and, bless them, an index). “Buy it, study it, enjoy
it. It’s as timeless as a book can be in our age of volubility” is the
endorsement by the New York Times.

On Writing Well (HarperCollins), William Zinsser. More for professional
writers, but full of useful wisdom.

Simply Speaking (HarperCollins), Peggy Noonan. Advice from a terrific
speechwriter.

Lend Me Your Ears: Great Speeches in History (W. W. Norton), Selected by
William Safire — also an outstanding speechwriter, columnist, and
student of current language.

Words Fail Me (Harcourt Brace), Patricia T. O’Conner. Guidance from a
former copy editor at the New York Times, with particularly useful
chapters on how to handle numbers and what to do when you’re stuck.

Successful Direct Marketing Methods (Crain Books), Bob Stone.

Still the most respected text in its field.

The Minto Pyramid Principle (Minto Publishing), Barbara Minto.

The comprehensive guide to logic in writing, thinking, and problem
solving.

Merriam-Webster Collegiate Dictionary, 10th ed. There are many good
dictionaries. This is the only desk-sized one we could find that has
both of two useful features: It draws distinctions between similar words
(like humor, wit, comedy, farce, burlesque, travesty) and it discusses
puzzling matters of usage (such as “which” vs. “that”).

How to Write for Development (Council for the Advancement and Support of
Education), Henry T. Gayley. A classic that includes contemporary
techniques, but with the same continuing message:

“Potential donors respond best to a well-stated case expressed in
simple, clear language.”

Guide to Proposal Writing (Foundation Center), Jane C. Geever and
Patricia McNeill. Steps for successful proposal writing to corporations
and foundations.

Say It with Charts (McGraw-Hill), Gene Zelazny. Advice on how to think
about charts, and how to choose the kind of chart that’s most
appropriate for your message.

The Economist Style Guide. Includes admonitions that apply to everyday
business writing as well as to the professionals on The Economist staff,
such as:

The first requirement of The Economist is that it should be readily
understandable. Clarity of writing usually follows clarity of thought.
So think what you want to say, then say it as simply as possible.

Use the language of everyday speech, not that of spokesmen, lawyers, or
bureaucrats.

Do not be hectoring or arrogant. Those who disagree with you are not
necessarily stupid or insane. Nobody needs to be described as silly: Let
your analysis prove that he is.

Don’t boast of your own cleverness by telling readers you correctly
predicted something or that you have a scoop. You are more likely to
bore or irritate than to impress them. …

The introduction to the latest edition affirms the importance of good
writing:

On only two scores can The Economist outdo its rivals consistently. One
is the quality of its analysis. The other is the quality of its writing.

Amen.

OceanofPDF.com

Acknowledgments

With thanks to our new e-pals and others who contributed their wisdom
and experience to this edition:

Seth Alpert, John Bernstein, Drayton Bird, Albie Collins, Jim Colosi,
Scott Cutler, Ron Daniel, Terri Dial, Dio Dipasupil, Ron Eller, Qazi
Fazal, Manny Fernandez, David Frieder, France Gingras, Greg Hackney,
Harold Kahn, Mike Kelley, Peter Larson, Giancarlo Livraghi, Murray Low,
Pete Lupo, Dudley Lyons, Toni Maloney, Louise McGinnes, Kent Mitchel,
Jane O’Connell, Matthew Raphaelson, Charles Rashall, Chris Reid, Mike
Reynolds, Mike Roberts, Karen Rosa, Randall Rothenberg, Angus Russell,
Jason Spero, Bob Stearns, Michael Trent, David Vining, Ray Wareham, Bill
Wright.

OceanofPDF.com

ABOUT THE AUTHORS

The authors worked together at Ogilvy & Mather Worldwide, a major
advertising agency noted for its interest in good writing. They have
left the advertising business but rejoin on projects like this.

KENNETH ROMAN, a former chairman and CEO of Ogilvy, is active on
corporate and nonprofit boards, where he sees lots of business writing —
and its abuse. He is also the coauthor of How to Advertise.

JOEL RAPHAELSON, a former Executive Creative Director at Ogilvy, is
mostly retired but rouses himself from time to time to write about
writing and other subjects.

The authors also worked together on The Unpublished David Ogilvy, edited
by Mr. Raphaelson (and abetted by Mr. Roman).

Visit www.AuthorTracker.com for exclusive information on your favorite
HarperCollins author.

OceanofPDF.com

PRAISE FOR

Writing That Works, 3rd Edition

“This is the best all-purpose writing guide I’ve ever seen.”

— LAWRENCE T. BABBIO, JR.

president and COO, Bell Atlantic Corporation

“Effective writing skills are invaluable in today’s business world — but
they’re also in short supply. In this concise book, Kenneth Roman and
Joel Raphaelson offer an abundance of practical tips for helping your
written and oral communications get the results you want.”

— WILLIAM C. STEERE, JR.

chairman and CEO, Pfizer, Inc.

“Clear, concise communications that make the right point will launch
your career or business to new heights. This book will show you how.”

— ROBERT SEELERT

chairman, Saatchi & Saatchi PLC

“In advertising, the challenge is to find the one simple, inspired
thought that makes a consumer buy a product. This book helps all of us
in the business world use the same discipline when we communicate our
own thoughts to each other.”

— PETER GEORGESCU

chairman emeritus, Young & Rubicam Inc.

“If you write and want to be understood, you need Writing That Works. An
essential primer on how to communicate and be understood, this book
should be on every communicator’s desk.”

— PETER LARSON

chairman and chief executive, Brunswick Corporation

“Roman and Raphaelson have done it again. Few people are able to keep up
with the times as they do. A must-read for the new E-mail crowd.”

— MANNY FERNANDEZ

chairman, Gartner Group

“Read this book. Write for action!”

— JEFFREY L. BLEUSTEIN

chairman and CEO, Harley-Davidson, Inc.

“Ken Roman and Joel Raphaelson’s Writing That Works works. Whether you
are writing a brief e-mail or a lengthy report, it provides clear and
concise ideas for improving your written communications.”

— JAY W. LORSCH

Louise E. Kirstein Professor of Human Relations, Harvard Business School

OceanofPDF.com

PREVIOUS BOOKS

How to Advertise

by Kenneth Roman and Jane Maas

The Unpublished David Ogilvy

Edited by Joel Raphaelson

OceanofPDF.com

[]

Copyright

WRITING THAT WORKS. Copyright © 2000 by Kenneth Roman and Joel
Raphaelson.

All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright
Conventions. By payment of the required fees, you have been granted the
non-exclusive, nontransferable right to access and read the text of this
ebook on-screen. No part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted,
downloaded, decompiled, reverse engineered, or stored in or introduced
into any information storage and retrieval system, in any form or by any
means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or hereinafter
invented, without the express written permission of HarperCollins
ebooks.

EPub Edition © JUNE 2010 ISBN: 978-0-062-03152-5

First Quill edition published 2000.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available upon
request.

ISBN 0-06-095643-7

00 01 02 03 04 /RRD 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

OceanofPDF.com

[]

OceanofPDF.com

About the Publisher

Australia

HarperCollins Publishers (Australia) Pty. Ltd.

25 Ryde Road (PO Box 321)

Pymble, NSW 2073, Australia

http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com.au

Canada

HarperCollins Canada

2 Bloor Street East - 20th Floor

Toronto, ON, M4W 1A8, Canada

http://www.harpercollinsebooks.ca

New Zealand

HarperCollinsPublishers (New Zealand) Limited

P.O. Box 1

Auckland, New Zealand

http://www.harpercollinsebooks.co.nz

United Kingdom

HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.

77-85 Fulham Palace Road

London, W6 8JB, UK

http://www.harpercollinsebooks.co.uk

United States

HarperCollins Publishers Inc.

10 East 53rd Street

New York, NY 10022

http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com

OceanofPDF.com

Document Outline

- Epigraph
- Preface: Why a Third Edition?
- 1. Writing That Works
- 2. Don’t Mumble—and Other Principles of Effective Writing
- 3. “I Love My Computer”
- 4. E-mail—the Great Mailbox in the Sky
- 5. Memos and Letters That Get Things Done
- 6. Writing for an Audience: Presentations and Speeches
- 7. Plans and Reports That Make Things Happen
- 8. Recommendations and Proposals That Sell Ideas
- 9. Asking for Money: Sales and Fund-Raising Letters
- 10. Coping with Political Correctness
- 11. Writing a Resume—and Getting an Interview
- 12. Editing Yourself
- 13. Making It Easy to Read
  - Other Books That Will Help You Write Better
  - Acknowledgments
  - About the Author
  - Praise for Writing That Works, 3rd Edition
  - Previous Books
  - Copyright
  - About the Publisher
